people are waiting longer to get
pregnant but if we can imagine that
there is a vault of your eggs by the
time you're born you have 1 to 2 million
in your reproductive years 300,000 this
means if you and your partner wait till
35 your chances of getting pregnant are
going to be
approximately I feel like I better get a
move on but there are things that we can
do to improve your reproduction and this
is information that nobody talks about
so let's get into it let's do it Dr
Natalie Crawford is a double certified
practicing fertility doctor helping
people to optimize their lifestyle to
improve fertility rates of infertility
are increasing one out of every eight
women would have infertility and now
it's one out of every five and there's
multiple factors that are contributing
including irregular or lack of having a
period there's more autoimmune disease
obesity chronic stress people are
waiting but at 40 your chance of
miscarriage is 50% and suddenly you're
left behind and I know that because I
had four pregnancy losses and I'm going
to cry now
lots of people will be struggling with a
variety of the things that you've talked
about what would you tell them you can't
control everything but you should be
able to control the factors you can so
what would my daily habits look like I
love that question so what have I got
misconceptions around how to increase
our odds of getting pregnant yes there's
so many myths if for female orgasms does
that increase the chance of fertility
this is super interesting and then what
is the number one thing that people
don't do that impacts their reproductive
system it seems is so straightforward
it's not a pill that you take or a major
change of behavior it is
simply we've just hit 6 million
subscribers on the dire of a CO um so me
and my team would like to do something
we've never done before as little thank
you and we're calling it The dire of a
CEO subscriber raffle and here is how it
works every episode this month we're
going to pick three current subscribers
at random and we'll send one of you a
1,000 voucher one of you tickets to come
and watch the dver SE behind the scenes
live with our team and one of you will
have a 10-minute phone call with me to
discuss what ever you want to talk about
if you're a subscriber you're in the
raffle thank you from the bottom of my
heart for allowing me to do something
that me and my team love doing so much
it is the greatest honor of my lifetime
and I hope it I hope it continues uh off
into the Future Let's get to the
episode
Natalie who are you and what is the
mission that you're on hi Stephen I am a
fertility doctor which means that I help
people
grow their family or plan for their
family no matter what that looks like
but my mission started because early in
my career I realized I was seeing people
when they were already behind the game
they didn't have the basic knowledge
about how their body worked their
hormones their reproductive system and I
had to bring them up to speed and every
time somebody said I wish I'd known this
earlier I can't believe I wasn't taught
this why isn't this the stuff that we're
taught because I might have made
different decisions earlier in my life
and that was a pivotal moment for me
about 8 years ago when I started
wondering if I could reach people
earlier in their Journey before they had
infertility before they were in my
office if maybe that could change the
trajectory of their course if they could
be more empowered with that education to
make the decisions that are right for
them versus just letting time pass which
ultimately makes some decisions for
people and when we talk about getting
started earlier and thinking about this
earlier when we we we hear the topic of
fertility I think most of us think it's
something that people over the age of 35
need to start worrying about or you know
once we get up until close to our 40s
then we need to start thinking about our
fertility more consciously but what
you're saying is is that fertility or
infertility starts much earlier in the
decisions we
make 100% if we view fertility as the
ability to get pregnant and infertility
is a disease the World Health
Organization the CDC everybody defines
infertility as a disease the inability
to get pregnant so then we can view
fertility as more of the health the
wellness State and just like we're
trying to prevent disease and other
aspects when it comes to cancer
Alzheimer's many other diseases we need
to be approaching our fertility as a
preventative action taking steps to make
sure that if having kids is one of your
life goals you're not making choices
that is going to make that impossible or
extremely difficult when you get to that
stage and what is the sort of macro
social cultural backdrop to this because
the conversation around fertility and
infertility to me and this might just be
a sort of perspective bias seems to have
suddenly increased over the last couple
of years um and I don't know whether
that's because I'm in that age range now
where my friends are having the
conversations or that I think socially
we're starting to think more about it
because there is some pretty alarming
data that's emerged around people
struggling more than ever to conceive
children because there's like social
factors at play exactly what are what is
that social backdrop so it's very
interesting when you try to put the
whole picture together one because we
are more aware of fertility we have
social media people are sharing their
stories 20 years ago you didn't know
somebody might have infertility or be
struggling similarly there was less
access to reproductive technology things
like egg freezing didn't exist you
couldn't do IVF unless you travel to a
city that had a big enough program and
so when there were limited ways to treat
something there was less access to get
into care to even be evaluated so one we
do have people more aware about their
fertility getting diagnosed earlier and
easier finding out problems sooner and
some of that is well I think all of
that's wonderful socially yes rates of
infertility are increasing we used to
say one out of every eight women would
have infertility and now in the US it's
one out of every five who's just trying
to conceive for the first time will have
infertility so that's a huge increase it
stays even when you confound studies for
age so the number one thing everybody
says is well people are waiting longer
to get pregnant which is absolutely true
I think only 5% of people started their
family overage 30 back in the 70s and
now it's 25 to 30% so we see a huge
increase and the number of people who
are waiting to start their family I did
you are especially as women are being
power to chase other dreams go to
professional school they're delaying
entry into childbearing so part of this
is that people are waiting later
diseases develop later but then also as
a society people are less healthy we see
more obesity we see more diabetes we see
more environmental toxins than we ever
have so I really think this is something
where there are multiple factors that
are all contributing to this alarming
rise of infertility that we're seeing
and are we having less sex than we used
to I think people are having less sex
yes especially as they age in the
reproductive age range it depends people
when they get married tend to be having
less sex but interestingly there's been
a really good study looking at marijuana
so we'll use it for example people who
smoke marijuana tend to get pregnant
less even though they're having more sex
than people who don't so when you say
this group's not smoking marijuana and
they're getting pregnant even though
they're having less sex than this other
group it's showing us that it's not just
timing or not having intercourse there
really are other factors at play that
are very socially acceptable that are
influencing the ability to get pregnant
I was reading through some research
earlier about fertility and the sort of
global Trends and I read this one St
that said the global fertility rate has
decreased from
4.84 live births per woman in 1950 to
2.23 in 2021 and it is expect to drop to
1.59 births per Woman by
2100 which means that we're there's
clearly a traj I mean if this is true
then there's a
trajectory to having less kids yeah in
the US it's 1.3 is the average right now
for a single woman or one person will
have on average 1.3 children that's very
alarming when you start thinking about
is that number just people are waiting
or what about all the people who just
can't get pregnant and I see those
people in my office over and over and
over again that are not able to get
pregnant even if they're starting young
so I think that we really have two
factors going into that statistic you
saw when it comes to sperm you know
study came out last year looking at
sperm counts and they've decreased 50%
in 50 years what's most alarming about
the sperm count decrease in men is that
in the past 10 years it's decreased at
Double the rate that it did the 40 years
prior so when we start looking at more
recently the rate of decline is
accelerating and that's got to be the
world around
us and you in 2020 founded the fora
Fertility clinic which is based over in
Austin how many couples women people
have you seen since you've opened that
clinic and what is the typical sort of
case study of why someone will come to
you in that clinic what are they
searching for what are they struggling
with I love that question so yes it
started fora in 2020 with my partner
Amanda Skiller and she and I have been
practicing for quite a while at this
time and realized that there wasn't an
approach at least in Austin for
personalized care because of that
probably the number one type of patient
that we see is coming in who's already
had lack of success somewhere else
meaning went to a clinic has been trying
the average patient is going to be
overage 36 has been trying for one to
two years learned about their Cycles
tracking their Cycles relatively normal
evaluation trying to do IVF and now is
not getting the result they wanted what
I find the hardest thing for people is
the isolation you're suddenly being left
behind in your friend and your peer
group when you're trying to have a child
and those in your world have succeeded
and suddenly you're left behind and the
stress and the isolation that causes
really makes the entire process so much
harder than many other medical diagnosis
that somebody might get and you give me
some more color on how that feels
because you you know how that feels I do
know how that feels so I had four
pregnancy losses before I have my two
children and this was a long time ago
and I was in the middle of training so I
was a resident and a fellow definitely
was not taking care of myself very well
because that was the life style of a
doctor in training and I didn't tell
anybody I was pregnant minus my husband
for the first three pregnancies because
people weren't sharing about their
pregnancies I had this idea I need to
wait till I'm in the safe zone I'm out
of that first trimester and so when I
started losing those pregnancies nobody
knew I was pregnant so it was so hard to
come and tell somebody that I was losing
the pregnancy when I hadn't even opened
that door to trust them with the first
piece of information it was very hard to
come in with
that subsequent request for support or
help and I just felt like that wasn't
what people were sharing or talking
about my fourth pregnancy loss was an
ectopic pregnancy which is a tubal
pregnancy so this is a pregnancy that
implants in the fallopian tube instead
of in the uterus those pregnancies
cannot grow the fallopian tube doesn't
have the blood supply to support a
placenta and the fallopian tube can
rupture and it can become a surgical
emergency in and be very scary that was
diagnosed for me when my husband was off
in a bachelor trip in Las Vegas and I
had to receive a medication in order to
try to stop the pregnancy from growing
but there was still a risk of the tube
rupturing and I was forced to call
friends have somebody come with me be
with
me and sharing it there was so much
support given that I realized that was
such a mistake of mine not that you need
to post every pregnancy announcement on
the Internet or tell everybody your job
but there are people in your life who
want to support you and they can't show
up if you don't let them know what's
going on and that's one of the things
that I tell my patients is that give the
people in your world the opportunity to
show up for you tell the people who are
asking who you turn to in other times of
Crisis tell them that you're struggling
with this let them show up and support
you because most of the time people will
they care about you and that is going to
lessen the burden because that isolating
peace the doubt and the fear especially
if you're a goal oriented person I have
set so many goals and I'm going to do
this and here's my path to do it so to
feel like I was failing at becoming a
mother when I didn't fail at anything
and now my body was failing me felt so
shameful so so much guilt and I had
nobody to share that with or to help
alleviate that burden from me you use
the word guilt there there's um complex
set of emotions that I've had described
when someone finds out that
their their pregnancy or even their sort
of their sexual organs more broadly are
struggling with something and I've got
lots of friends that have been diagnosed
with a variety of different conditions
um in that in that sort of with their
sort of sexual health and you almost
observe a feeling that they can often
feel like they are broken in some way
like they're not they're not you know
working they're like a broken
person and I I I say that to try and
highlight the fact that those that's
there's so many people going through
that exact same thing and that all of
these conditions are very um a lot of
people are struggling in Silence with
that feeling of of inadequacy you're so
right there's so much stigma to
infertility there there's so much
misinformation and uncertainty when it
comes to reproductive Health together
that makes it difficult for people to
talk about or ask questions and when you
feel like one of the things that you
always thought was certain about your
future if you were a child and you
envisioned your life 30 years from there
something if you envisioned having
children and suddenly you're faced with
the potential reality that that might
not happen or it might not happen
without
intervention that really crashes down a
piece of your own identity and and who
you saw yourself to be who you wanted to
be and trying to struggle with that true
identity crisis at that moment really
brings out so many emotions it's what so
many of the people who sit across from
me every day say I just I don't feel
like myself I feel like I'm stuck while
everybody else is moving on because I'm
broken my body is failing me it's so
hard to watch somebody go through it and
even if I can't get everybody pregnant
or control the outcome the thing that I
always say is that at a minimum you need
to understand how your body works at a
minimum you can know that you're making
the choices that are right for you you
can feel good that you did everything
that you could and that there wasn't
education you needed or choices you
would have made looking back in the
rearview mirror and even when somebody's
deep in the midst of failed IVF Cycles
or sitting across from me
I say the same thing that's that's our
minimum you deserve to understand why
we're making the choices so that this
can be a process where you can advocate
for your care and we can collaboratively
do everything we can to try to achieve
this goal for you I had um got a good
friend who's just um because OB I'm at
the age now where my friendship cycle is
starting to go and get fertility tests
done and such and they're trying for
kids many of them are have been very
successful but I've got one particular
friend who has been trying for some time
they're struggling so they went and got
the the tests done and it turns out that
one of them in that relationship has
some has some issues which are
complicating their chances of getting
pregnant and when I heard that God I
can't imagine how that person feels in
that relationship because it I can
imagine in your head how you can start
to overthink and you can feel that word
again that word guilt towards your
partner and you can start thinking oh my
God this person's going to leave me
because I can't give them what they want
and all of that sort of complex those
complex slightly irrational but
completely understandable
thoughts the relationship aspect is so
hard even going through it myself
because my husband wanted to support me
and of course he did but I felt like I
was the one failing not him right I'm
the one who's not bringing my aame to
the table this is a me problem and even
though it's an us problem it felt like a
me problem to the point where
I really try to level the playing field
to all of my patients at least when I
see them and say it's the two of you
you're a team this is a team it doesn't
matter whose diagnosis comes back as
what we are trying to get us pregnant
and really reframe everything that way I
have a patient story from the Past who
had been going through infertility been
going through IVF because she found out
she was running out of eggs early and
she had taken a lot of blame for not
freezing her eggs earlier for waiting
longer and going through
IVF her
husband turns out his sperm wasn't
functioning the way that it should and
we didn't know that until you fertilize
the eggs with it and really see how
embryos grow in the
lab and she said to me at our follow-up
visit even though the outcome of that
cycle was devastating to have no embryos
developed because they found this sperm
issue it improved their marriage so much
because For the First
Time her partner and her they felt like
they were on even playing field that
they were both part of the reason they
were in this situation and whether it
was imposed by him or not she had
carried that guilt that shame that
broken feeling alone like it was just
her so let's get into it then let's do
it let's talk about fertility where do
we need to start I was going to assume
where I need to start here but I'm an
absolute muggle and idiot as it relates
to fertility and female and male
reproductive health so where do we start
if we want to understand fertility I
always like to start with the ovary and
understanding the difference in eggs and
sperm so we'll do sperm first and we'll
do eggs okay do you know how many sperm
you make in a day do I know uh how about
how many you make in a
second no I have no idea the average man
makes 200 to 300 million sperm in a day
and 1,500 sperm a second so men 1500 a
second you're just
like so men in their testes have germ
cells meaning they can just produce
brand new sperm at very high rates every
single day and in the ovary for women
it's so different because you are born
with all the eggs you're ever going to
have and you run out of them over time
and this means that one the number of
eggs you have raining is a part of the
picture and two your eggs sit inside
your body and they absorb the wear and
The Tear and the world around you your
whole life where your sperm lifespan is
90 days takes 72 days for a sperm to
grow across the testicle and then 18
days to get out the ejaculatory system
so you have three months so you could
change your life and change your sperm
counts in three months why does it take
18 days I thought if in my little idiot
head I thought that I make my sperm okay
today and then if I ejaculate that's the
sperm out no yeah those sperm those
sperm were made a couple months ago
really yeah they're like in storage
lockers so that you have some for every
day so they kind of get put in line so
that you can send them out at that right
time
period okay so but if you ejaculate
multiple times eventually you can't keep
producing more but so let's imagine that
you have lockers and we'll just pretend
that there's 200 million sperm in each
one if you ejaculate every single day
you're ejaculating 200 million sperm
each time now if you're saving up for a
couple days you're going to ejaculate
400 million and now if you've waited
three days 600 million the catch here is
sperm are so fragile they're so fragile
they like to die they get tadp oh those
little tadpoles so if you wait too long
you're just going to have a bunch of
dead guys and then they're going to
impair the ability of the better sperm
to even function and I use the analogy
of imagining that this is a Highway and
the dead sperm are stalled cars all over
the freeway even if your sperm counts
normal if you're having very long
abstinence periods in between your
intercourse times you're going to have a
sample that has so much debris and dead
sperm in it that it's going to make it
hard for the good guys to do their job
okay so there is so you do need to keep
ejaculating to remain to optimize your
fertility your chances of fertilizing an
egg yes oh I didn't know that and how
often G I always say it's going to
there's a fine balance here somewhere
between every day to every 3 to four
days is going to be the best whether
that is ejaculation in any form what
whatever suits your fancy we see that
longer than seven days for the most for
most people will severely increase the
amount of debris that you see and the
proportion of the ejaculate that is dead
sperm super interesting so let's go
we'll stay at the the foundations we're
talking about sperm and eggs so is that
sperm covered off is there okay and
sperm counts as you said earlier have
been reducing over the last 50 years by
50% which is horrifying um why is there
something in particular in our
environment that's causing that it's all
the things and some of them are
changeable and some of them are not so
we have to view the world as it is
certainly we see we've got more men who
are unhealthy who are overweight who
have other medical comorbidities that
are also impacting their ability to make
sperm like if you have high cholesterol
if you have diabetes some of those
things are going to impact your overall
health and the production of sperm so
this goes for sperm or egg the hormone
access from the brain to your gonad your
gonads are either your testes or your
ovaries your brain is constantly
interpreting signals from your whole
body and is trying to determine can
stepen have a kid right now and if you
become very stressed now back in the day
what was that there was a bear attacking
you there was a famine so you had no
food there was a plague going around
then it say this is not a good time to
have a child right now because because
you can't support your own body or the
world around you your adrenal glands are
making cortisol because it's so
stressful or your calorie intake went
down so your brain says this is too
difficult I'm going going to shut off
the system to make reproductive hormones
and that happens in both men and it can
happen in women so the brain is
constantly interpreting the world around
you and then sending out signals to make
eggs or sperm like to make eggs grow or
to be making sperm and the hormones that
are associated with them so estrogen and
progesterone for women and testosterone
for men and so one we have anything that
interferes with this pathway people are
more ill there's more autoimmune disease
more
inflammation there's more stress chronic
stress there's more obesity but then we
also see the environmental impact as
well so
certainly there's so many toxins in our
world from the foods we eat from the air
we breathe from the type of you know
kitchen wear that we use what we put in
and on our body all of it makes a little
bit of a difference and we know some
people if you live in an area with high
pollution you're going to have lower
sperm counts and a reduced fertility
rate but that might not be something you
can change because that's where you live
but it might be even more important for
that person to understand it and then
want to not also smoke marijuana or
drink out of plastics or do other things
that might be adding to that burden so
smoking marijuana and smoking cigarettes
are no NOS if I absolute no no know so I
think cigarettes most people are pretty
aware cigarettes are pretty bad for your
health if we talk about reproductive
Health in general cigarette smoking for
for women and your eggs are going to
decrease your egg count your egg quality
and the rate of miscarriage
significantly significantly for men what
we see is it decreases your sperm count
your sperm motility and the quality the
shape of the sperm also increasing
miscarriage marijuana does this as well
if you smoke marijuana even if your
partner does not and is never around you
when you're using it she has a higher
chance of a miscarriage just because
you're smoking marijuana how because of
DNA damage inside the sperm's head okay
I'm giving out bad sperm you're giving
out bad sperm what about vaping we don't
know as much about vaping but it appears
in all the preliminary studies to be
similarly very bad that what is in um
what you're breathing with vaping
might even be more harmful than
cigarettes
potentially what about phones and
laptops oh I love this one okay so
that's a great question and people ask
about it two ways to look at it there
was a study that was published last year
that actually looked at this and we'll
talk about just having your phone using
your phone and then location of the
phone in the study what they looked at
is phone usage from 2005 to 2018 so we
have to remember in 2005 phones were
different it wasn't quite the same but
they had a much higher uh radiation
emitted from them so modern phones
actually emit much less radiation so
even though we keep them on our person
they're ultimately safer than what we
saw as origin phones from 2005 to 2010
in this study that they looked at the
number of times that you used your phone
which is wild to us because we use our
phone constantly now but the number of
times you use your phone the more you
used it the less firm you
made okay
however that was most impactful for the
early generation phones from 2005 to
2010 so when they stratified and looked
at some of the phones we have now we're
not seeing that same impact and I think
that is because there's less radiation
and also everybody uses their phone more
than 20 times per day right you're using
it all the time location didn't matter
there was no difference of location
whether you kept your phone in your
pocket your back pocket the counter off
your body there was no difference so I
think that helps us understand some of
the radiation aspect of the phone and if
that is impacting sperm heat of the
testicle is of course something very
very different I do think you talked to
Reena about this so when it comes to the
testicles they live outside your body
for a reason we know that men who have
an undescended testicle even if it's
surgically removed sorry what's an
undescended testicle you can be born
with one of your testicles in your
abdomen instead of in your scrotum okay
and that's usually surgically corrected
before the age of one because if it
stays internally the heat of the body is
too hot and it destroys the cells the
inability to make sperm inability to
make testosterone so the testicle is
outside the body in the scrotum so that
it can be kept at a lower body
temperature we know that things that
increase the temperature of the scrotum
do impact sperm production and
testosterone production testosterone and
sperm are made together so one thing is
going to influence one it will influence
the other this is sauna use every day
hot tub use every day laptop in your lap
if you are putting your phone
exactly by your scrotum every single day
then it might be having an impact if
it's heating up and it's the heat that's
causing the problem not the radiation
that's being emitted from it so we
always are asking if I see somebody for
infertility I'm going through any
behaviors that are significantly
increasing the temperature of the
scrotum to see if that is a modifiable
factor what about hot baths if we're
having lots of hot baths if it's daily
and you sit in there for you know more
than 15 minutes then I would cut that
down to not be daily I see this a lot in
Austin from people who love to cycle so
they're on a bike they're outside they
want to go ride for two to three hours
at a time time numerous times a week
that's a lot of
heat contained right to the scrotum area
and we often see significantly lower
sperm counts in men who cycle at that
intense
level interesting right very
interesting um what about trt you talked
about the the correlation there and the
relationship between sperm and um
testosterone levels if Men start taking
trt which is hormone replacement
therapies testosterone repl therapy um
does that impact the quality of my sperm
and my chances of fertility stepen at
least one time per week I will see a
couple who comes into my office who has
been trying to get pregnant and the male
partner went to a Hormone Clinic a men's
health and he was put on trt for libido
or fatigue or something and essentially
that is male birth control because
taking testosterone yourself is telling
your brain that there is testosterone
present because naturally testosterone
is made as sperm is made if your brain
thinks there's a lot of testosterone it
says hey we don't need to make much more
we're doing really good so the hormones
from your brain stop being sent out and
no longer tell your testicle to make any
more testosterone or any more sperm so
trt use makes men aspermic meaning
having no sperm in the ejaculate you
still have an ejaculate it looks the
same to you but when we go look at it
under the microscope there's no sperm in
it sometimes that is irreversible the
longer you've taken trt for there is a
chance that I might not be able to get
sperm to return to your ejaculate it
might be permanent let's talk about eggs
let's talk about eggs you have this um
wonderful example where I guess it's a
bit of an analogy called The Vault yes
I've got um some marbles over here in a
jar which I thought would um help us to
visualize this idea of a vault so I've
put about I don't know there looks like
there's about how many marbles do you
reckon there're in there if you uh get
it right you win the whole lot uh 200
marbles 200 I'm going to say we'll count
after um well now you're counting that's
different than guessing no no no no I'm
not I'm not just go on have a guess how
many marbles are in there we'll count
after see who's right okay I said 200
okay anyone in the comment section below
Al so you can you guys can also guess
don't cheat don't skip to the end I
think there's about
he is counting that is not I can't count
them all can I cuz I can't see them all
seven times nobody else can see them all
and count them 140 okay this is the
analogy I'm going to pass them over to
you um I'd love you to use this as an a
visual aid to explain to me this idea of
the vault as a as a way to understand
how many eggs women have and how that
changes over the course of Our Lives
love it all right so I like to think
about the ovary as inside your ovary if
we can imagine that there is a vault of
your eggs so that is what this jar is
representing so again in contrast in men
testes are making brand new sperm every
single day in women when you are a five
Monon baby inside your mother's womb you
have the most eggs you're ever going to
have you have six to seven million eggs
by the time you're born you have 1 to
two million by the time you start
puberty you have half a million your
reproductive years you're going to start
with about
300,000 and by the time you go in to
menopause you'll have less than a
thousand left so you still have a few
eggs left women only ovulate about 400
to 500 eggs over the course of their
lifetime so if you're born with 1 to two
million and you only ovulate 400 to 500
that seems like confusing math so the
way that I think about it is that every
single month you are losing eggs from
this Vault and what is happening is that
the eggs are coming out in proportion to
how many are inside so when the vault is
more full more eggs come out that month
and when the vault is less full less
eggs come out so if we can imagine one
month you're going to have a group of
eggs all come out of the Vault and so if
this is our ovary what we would imagine
is that the Vault sent out all of these
small eggs and each egg grows inside a
follicle the brain is going to send out
follicle stimulating hormone once you
start puberty so before puberty all of
these eggs are just going to die after
that month is over but once you've
started puberty FSH so follicle
stimulating hormone from the brain will
come and stimulate one of these eggs why
only one because humans are not meant to
have litters you can only carry one
child at a time in our uterus so this is
the protective mechanism by which humans
don't have multiple children most of the
time so each egg grows inside what we
call a small follicle so the brain sends
out follicle stimulating hormone
this is one of the rare times where in
medicine hormones are named for what
they do in women not men because you
have FSH and lh2 FSH controls the
production of sperm for you and LH the
production of testosterone but for women
FSH controls the stimulation of one
follicle so this follicle will grow and
this one will ovulate and the rest of
them will die so that's one of the 400
that I'm going to lose these just go
away I want to make sure I understand
this so in the J
is the Vault that's inside the woman y
um at every month this is what's
available this month okay she produces
quite a few like when you're younger
yeah CU there's more in my jar
proportionately there's like okay
there's 20 or 30 and they're
proportionately to a jar that has 200
these numbers aren't obviously ratioed
but and then one of them is basically
selected to ovulate at random at random
so it's one of the great Mysteries if we
could control which one because it
doesn't have any more likelihood to be
genetically normal or good just because
it responds so what is interesting when
we think about this vault is as we said
when we have less eggs less are coming
out every month so you're going to start
to dump out less
eggs and the jar gets emptier what age
was I then and what age am I now so we
can say that you you know were 30 at one
point and now we're starting to get to
about age 34 at this point okay what
starts to happen just for numbers so at
age 30 you're going to have about 20
eggs come out of the Vault every month
one EG will ovulate 19 will die next
month another group okay when you get to
about 35 you're going to have about 14
to 15 so still pretty close when you get
to 40 it'll be about 8 to 10 per month
44 closer to three to four per month so
you start to see that after age 37
specifically a more rapid decline in how
many eggs are remaining therefore less
are coming out every month this idea is
really for two reasons one is that all
women run out of eggs when you run out
of eggs you're an ovarian failure also
known as menopause average age of
menopause is 51 to 52 I've seen somebody
have menopause at age 13 so I've seen
primary amenorrhea where somebody was
born with ovaries that never made
follicles I've had women who had their
periods and then they ran out of eggs in
their 20s so some people are on
different Pathways now maybe they were
born with less maybe something happened
to them along the way to make them run
out of them faster so certain things can
get in the vault and impact our ultimate
egg count so as we already said smoking
cigarettes marijuana use endometriosis
which we haven't touched on quite yet
but we will
chemotherapy environmental toxins so
certain things can get in here and make
us run out of eggs faster
what's also important to understand is
that the eggs that are out in one month
are all the eggs we have to work with so
when we start talking about egg freezing
or IVF I can only get the eggs that have
been sent out of the vault in that month
to grow I cannot tap into the Vault and
this is why if you've had friends go
through IVF or egg freezing and it
sounds random somebody got six eggs and
somebody had 24 somebody had to do
multiple Cycles or months sometimes in
order to help somebody get enough eggs
to have a normal embryo what we have to
do is multiple months so the 10 eggs
that are available this month I'm going
to get them all to grow not just the one
you are normally going to ovulate take
those eggs out of the body and then next
month when your body gives me another
group of 10 I'm going to get them all to
grow again and take those eggs out of
the body that is ovarian stimulation for
for either egg freezing or IVF trying to
say hey in this month I don't want to
let any of these eggs die because I need
more of them to get the job done or
we're running out of time and I'm trying
to expedite your opportunity for
conception so women have this decline in
the total number of eggs you're going to
have when you're 37 I think the number
is that you have close to 20,000 eggs
remaining so what a huge drop from when
you started puberty at half million so
it's just going down so fast every
single month what is also happening is
that because these this vaults inside
our
body when you smoke the cigarettes when
you eat processed foods when you get
sick if you have chronic inflammation
you're losing some but the ones that are
here at the bottom they've been here the
whole
time and so in addition to number of
eggs we have to talk about the quality
of the eggs because these
eggs down here at the bottom once you
get older they've been sitting here a
long time and that means that their
chromosomes inside of them are much more
likely to be abnormal than normal and
that's really the rate limiting step in
people getting pregnant when they're
older not that my vault is more empty
not that I'm sending out less per month
but that the ones that have been sitting
here have have been sitting here longer
and
they aren't as good I I use the analogy
for the chromosomes so if we
imagine your eggs hold your chromosomes
in perfect position so that they're
ready to then go be fertilized by sperm
it is like having kindergarteners stand
in a line for 40 years somebody's going
get out of line and when that happens
that increases the rate of genetic
abnormalities and most of those do not
fertilize do not implant or misc carry
at age 40 if you see a positive
pregnancy test your chance of
miscarriage is
50% because they've been sitting here
even if you're very healthy just time
and normal life impacts things but
there's choices you make that cause them
to degrade faster and there's things
that you do that might be protective and
that is something that we don't ever
talk about we when you're 35 your chance
of miscarriage is 25% so there's a huge
change that happens between AG 35 and
age 40 when you're 35 and you start
trying to get pregnant so if you and
your partner wait and you say
everything's good we're going to wait
till we're 35 your chances of getting
pregnant per month are going to be
approximately 10 to 15% per month that's
not not very high it's not great not
great at 40 it's about 5% per month so
we've dropped dramatically and just see
the positive test and then if you see it
50% are abnormal so the odds of the body
is going to choose from the eggs that
are sent out that one month when you're
40 the odds
that your body is going to choose one of
the two eggs that is genetically normal
because six of them are abnormal it's
not very probable so most months your
body's ovulating one that's not going to
have the potential to become a liveborn
baby I feel like I better get a move on
Jesus Christ it's not information to
scare people but it is information that
nobody talks about well as you were sat
here talking to me about this the
opposite of
confronting the truth is Regret yes and
I can't imagine how much regret you've
seen I wanted to ask you about about
that regret because you must have to
deliver so much bad news to people and
you must see
the retrospective Clarity that those
people suddenly get when they realize
that those decisions they could have
made
earlier especially
for people who are not used to not being
in control of things and who just didn't
have the data they needed to make the
decision there are people who have been
with their partner for very long time
and maybe kids weren't in the plan
earlier but they could have been had
they known that it would have been so
hard or potentially impossible later on
one thing that I think is important to
discuss here when it comes to regret is
testing female fertility because there
is a marker of how many eggs do you have
we call this your ovarian reserve how
many eggs are left in the vault and one
way you can test this is with a blood
test called amh or antim malarian
hormone and the other way is to do an
ultrasound and see how many eggs are
outside the vault at that month so both
of these are actually quite important
when you're thinking about how many eggs
somebody
has that number does not impact you
getting pregnant in one month and I
think that that's important because if
you
have we'll use a whole group you could
have a whole group of eggs or you could
have less how many eggs is your body
ovulating in each group so this
person crazy this person who has more is
ovulating one this person who has left
is ovulating
one so if I have two people who are the
same age and they have different ovarian
reserves meaning they have a different
number of eggs left in their vault
they're going to send out a different
number of eggs each month how many eggs
are they ovulating each
month one one yes look at me learning
look at you so they're each going to
ovulate one egg so what are their
chances of getting
pregnant the same the same so having a
lower egg count does not impact your
monthly chance of getting pregnant
that's determined by age by the
proportion of these eggs that are normal
or abnormal however if you have fewer
eggs there's fewer that I can get to
grow with IVF and you have overall less
of an opportunity to grow your family
this is important because a lot of
societies will tell people not to check
somebody's ovarian reserve and this
blows my mind I have a really hard time
with this because they say if it doesn't
impact your monthly chance of pregnancy
having a low ovarian reserve is only
going to cause undue stress so the
American College of OBGYN recommends not
checking an amh level in women who are
not trying to get pregnant and who are
not having
infertility I completely disagree with
this because you can't make decisions on
data you don't know
and if you know you're running out of
eggs faster you very well might make
different decisions you might freeze
your eggs you might try to get pregnant
sooner you might try to just be
healthier if you are doing behaviors
that you know are decreasing your egg
count you might stop smoking pot but if
you're never giving that opportunity
you're going to live in the regret
category where when you find that out
later I wish I'd known this earlier I
wish I'd been able to make a choice when
I had the opportunity and I had the eggs
remaining and so by not testing by not
knowing we are hurting more women and I
always tell my obgy and friends this
conversation should be hand inand with
Stephen are you'all trying to get
pregnant yes or no no what birth control
might you want let's talk about it oh
should we check your ovarian reserve to
make sure that your time is okay again
having a good account does doesn't mean
you're going to get pregnant your chance
is the same however it means you have
more opportunity of time to try to grow
that family and ultimately a greater
chance of success when it comes to IVF
or egg freezing because the factors that
determine success are how many eggs you
have and how many are normal a lot of
people do ask that question they ask um
you know they'll say things like well my
parents didn't have to worry about this
or my grandparents didn't have to worry
about getting checked and seeing how big
my ovarian reserve is so you know why do
we have to all start doing that
now we know a lot more now and I think
the honest answer here is that one way
to look at this is that when I was your
age egg freezing didn't exist so I could
not have Frozen my eggs and my early 30s
had I wanted to meaning would you check
it if you really can't offer somebody
things to intervene or way to make a
change however now we know factors that
impact how many eggs you have
and we have the ability to freeze eggs
with very high success rates now it's
accessible in almost all fertility
clinics with really great egg
survival so this poses the question of
should you know earlier we also have
Generations where people are curious and
they see things online they're not
afraid of scary health information
instead younger Generations want to
understand their bodies and I love that
but there's so much misinformation
online too that it's really saying that
this is personal we can talk about eggs
and ofal every single day but until
somebody comes in to my office or
somebody else's office to get their own
evaluation done they're not going to
have the true data they need to make
that decision but I think it's great
that we are approaching fertility as a
health marker trying to look for signs
earlier that things might be wrong
especially given the opportunity to try
to intervene if you find out your sperm
counts lower we might be able to try
interventions for 3 to six months and
see if we can get a new group of sperm
that potentially has fixed that
problem so say I'm starting out in life
with a full ovarian reserve or say you
know here's my ovarian reserve at say 20
years old if I start engaging in
unhealthy lifestyle choices if I start
eating process food if I become obese
Etc does that take marbles out of this
jar does that take eggs out of my
Reserve or does that just damage the
quality of the eggs in the jar both both
okay so it pulls them out and it makes
them less effective the way I think
about it is not that it's pulling them
out giving them an opportunity but
essentially let's imagine it's getting
you smoke cigarettes the cigarette smoke
is getting inside the Vault it is
damaging the DNA and some of your eggs
but it's also just killing some of them
inside the Vault themselves so that you
are running out inside the vault
ultimately people who smoke cigarettes
go into menopause years earlier than the
average age really because they have had
a destruction of the eggs inside their
vault if I wanted to make sure that my
ovarian reserve was 10 out of 10 you
know I did if I was to live a perfect
life in terms of what my aarian Reserve
needs to be healthy how would I live
what what what would my daily habits
look like that's a great question I love
it so what can you try to do because you
can't control everything but you should
be able control the factors you can so
number one we're going to say avoid
toxic behaviors so toxic behaviors
that's going to be your cigarettes your
marijana cocaine you're going to H not
have any alcohol definitely alcohol
especially in proportion is showing an
increased risk of damage so a drink here
or there like that's not studied as well
but we know moderate to high drinking
levels is associated with reduced egg
quality what's moderate to usually
considered four drinks a week four
drinks a week so if I have four glasses
of champagne a week yep so you have four
glasses tonight at dinner you've hit
moderate that is I mean most people
especially in Britain oh well here too
and I mean honestly with Co especially
we saw so many people increase their
drinking substantially so you would
limit the toxic behaviors number two is
you're going to limit the toxins in your
world that you can again if you live in
an area
that is a high pollution area that just
might be where you live but you should
not cook in plastic put plastic in the
microwave or the dishwasher you
shouldn't use teflon on your pans you
shouldn't touch thermal paper receipts
like at the airport if they print off a
ticket for you or a receipt from the
grocery store that has chemicals in it
itself takeout food so when you order
your takeout food and it comes to you
and it sits in the containers that it
comes in if you're not eating it right
away or even when you do eat it you
should take it out of that container and
put it in something else put it in glass
put it on a plate because especially
with heat we see leeching of those toxic
chemicals into the food and then you're
consuming the food even if it's high
quality good food it now has absorbed
chemicals from the packaging that it was
in so microwave meals in plastic you
know you take the plastic and you
microwave it shouldn't do
it how do we we know this have they have
they done research on this or is this
just so there is research done on it
it's always hard to study lifestyle
factors in humans and when it comes to
fertility because what is the outcome is
it the positive pregnancy test the
having the baby the absence of getting
pregnant that your regular Cycles
there's so many different variables you
can look at at an endpoint a lot of the
environmental chemical studies are done
on animal studies looking at some of
these chemicals but also we can see in
populationbased studies we do have now
where they've done cohort studies mean
they take a group of people and they
follow them for years taking blood and
urine samples to measure some of these
chemicals and then watching what's
happening with their normal behavior no
intervention are they getting pregnant
when they're trying to or are they not
and we see that greater exposure to
these known toxic chemicals are making
it harder for people to get
pregnant when it comes to other factors
to try to have your healthiest Vault
possible decreasing inflammation is
going to be very important so we think
about inflammation and there's two types
so you have acute inflammation you cut
your arm and it's going to react and
heal and that's a normal bodily process
but then you have chronic inflammation
where your body is constantly spending
its energy fighting that inflammatory
State and that inflammation markers the
prostaglandins the factors in your body
that get really high
that's actually pretty toxic to our
quality as well and that can be disease
States as well so things like
endometriosis or other inflammatory or
autoimmune diseases what um what ways do
we voluntarily increase our inflammation
is that dietary predominantly yes so
number one is going to be not sleeping
enough so sleep is when your body heals
sleep is when your cells repair their
damage so you need to get S and a half
to eight hours of sleep per night I
heard you say in a sleep is probably the
number one thing that people don't do
that does impact their reproductive
hormone
system yes it seems so straightforward
to say it's not a pill that you take it
is not a major change of behavior it's
not missing out on something in your
life it is simply giving your body the
time that it needs to heal from the
normal inflammation that you're going to
encounter during the day simply
prioritizing getting enough sleep is the
simplest things somebody can do to try
to improve their reproduction and how
their hormones are made and
interpreted we talked about stress
earlier stress impacts the brain in a
similar way there's different types of
stressors very similarly you have your
acute stressor the bear you have the
stress of everyday life and modern world
is a lot more stressful in a lot of
different ways
constantly we also see that that stress
is so individualized so it's not like I
can say you need to go to yoga or you
need to do acupuncture or you need to go
to therapy I tell my patients for stress
reduction understanding that having a
constantly stressed State constantly may
have having cortisol be made is not
going to allow your brain to in to
interpret the other signals that are
being sent it's clouding its judgment
and it's going to think that you're not
at a place to maybe support a pregnancy
and your reproductive hormones are going
to show for that what that comes down to
is that you've got to modify stress in
some way for you so everybody's
different and maybe it is acupuncture
maybe it is Yoga I I like to sit on the
back porch in the morning hours with a
cup of coffee and hear the birds people
like to go on walks therapy mindfulness
meditation journaling everybody's
different but you deserve taking 20
minutes every day and dedicating it to
something that doesn't have your iPad
your cell phone your computer the TV and
putting yourself in an environment where
you can
say like have that feeling of release
you get when your cortisol drops that's
important so that your body can then
properly respond when you do have a
stressful situation and can allow you to
heal not be under a constant attack
diet's going to be one of the hugest
things that people can make a change in
processed foods refined sugar processed
Meats those are not natural foods and
those are things that come with a lot of
chemicals inside of them a lot of
contaminants we know that processed
Meats for example type 1 carcinogens all
these sugars have a direct correlation
with somebody's ability to get pregnant
when it comes to the direct cause it's
usually going to be sperm quality or egg
quality depending on the study looked at
what about red meat oh I love that
question number one I think it's really
important that nutritional studies
people qualify meat differently so it
might be all meat it might be types of
meat so we have to take it with a in
perspective of the limitation of the
data we know that process Meats impact
fertility we know that red meats appear
to impact both sperm production and egg
and embryo quality there was an IVF
study done and the more servings of red
meat you had in a week the
less embryos you had developed
throughout the process than somebody who
had fewer servings
so that's telling us that
it's maybe not one red meat in general
is bad one serving but it's about the
amount right everything in moderation
nothing in excess we know that the
healthiest fertility diet high in fruits
and vegetables fruits and vegetables are
fiber sources they are antioxidants they
are helping our body function
appropriately they're helping our gut
function they are lowering inflammation
I say meat is okay I don't eat meat but
that doesn't mean that none of my
patients should eat meat I give them
this diet because I think you have to
make dietary change accessible if I told
everybody stop eating meat nobody's
going to listen to anything but we know
that it's the amount the quantity so I
say if you're going to eat an omnivore
diet which is going to be the majority
of people have a meatless Monday
meatless Monday you automatically can do
and you're going to have to substitute
in some of those other sources of
protein that are ultimately better for
you fish fish is great we should limit
fish to three times per week just due to
risk of mercury but fish is a wonderful
option it does have a lot of good
omega-3 fatty acids in it and ultimately
eating more fish and less red meat is
such a great substitute what about
skimmed milk and fertility I heard uh
I've heard you speak a little bit about
that past so what's interesting and I
think that we've grown up in this you
know fat obsessed culture that has
prioritized lowfat no fat foods and
number one
fat is important in the production of
steroid hormones estrogen progesterone
testosterone are steroid hormones so
they need cholesterol the source of that
cholesterol is important so we should
have those healthy fats the nuts the
avocados the oils fantastic healthy fats
are wonderful but when it comes to Dairy
we've seen that whole fat Dairy is
associated with better fertility better
ovulation than the skim dairy products
probably due to the processing if we
View skim milk as the processed version
if I'm going to take out the fat that
normally comes in the milk but still
want it to retain looking like milk it's
not just minus fat right it's minus fat
plus something else so in the production
process it's that or it's potentially
that the only benefit the dairy really
has is being a source of a healthy fat
option and that when you take out that
fat you lose that so I recommend that if
you consume Dairy
that you stick with the whole fat
versions you don't do skim or lowfat and
in moderation for for dairy consumption
I say that if you do meatless Monday the
rest of your meals for the week you
should have one serving a meat per day
that's going to make you just force you
to eat more fruits and vegetables and
then one of those meals you should have
red meat if you like red meat not
multiple times a week and then you
should limit processed foods
sugars processed Meats all those refined
carbohydrates all the packaged things
that are totally fake that should be
very rare those are your if occasion
type of foods not your everyday Foods um
the other thing we didn't talk about
regarding lifestyle choices is exercise
oh yes now there's kind of two schools
of thought here because I have some
friends who exercise a lot and they have
seen a
disregulated menstrual cycle yes all
their periods have completely stopped um
but I also read that exercise is good
for
fertility this is a great opportunity to
just think about how the ovaries work
like we've talked about having your eggs
but if we think about in a given month
you have that group of eggs that comes
out of the Vault each eggs in the
follicle we already said FS or follicle
stimulating hormone is the hormone from
the brain that goes and stimulates that
one egg to grow as that egg grows the
follicles growing and making estrogen
that process takes approximately two
weeks in the majority of women and when
you're estrogen level gets high enough
it tells the brain you have a mature egg
your brain doesn't know what's happening
in your ovary it can't see I always say
it's like having your best friend who
doesn't go on Instagram they have no
idea what's happening in your life
unless you tell them so the only way
that the ovary communicates with the
brain is actually through the production
of hormones so as that one follicle is
starting to grow it is making estrogen
and that estrogen is then telling our
brain we have a follicle growing that
follicle then is going to open up it
bursts it ruptures and what's a follicle
sorry oh a follicle is if we can imagine
this is a follicle the egg is
microscopic inside of it it is the fluid
filed structure that keeps your egg so
for people that are are just listening
and not can't see yes you're holding one
of the little eggs in your a marble I'm
holding a marble so if we can imagine a
follicle is a small fluid filed
structure in which the egg is kept okay
so the eggs inside the follicle exactly
and so the follicle gets bigger as the
egg gets more mature sure it makes more
estrogen that estrogen at a high enough
level and it's very specific 200 PS for
50 hours tells the brain you have a
mature egg the brain will then send out
LH or lutenizing hormone it allows that
follicle to open up then the egg is
going to be released and hopefully get
captured by the fallopian tube so it'll
be sucked up into the fallopian tube but
that fle reforms so the egg is gone the
follicle reforms and it becomes a cyst
in your ovary called the Corpus ludum
and it is now stimulated by LH from the
brain telling it to make progesterone
okay and what am I going to do with the
progesterone progesterone opens and
closes the implantation window without
progesterone a pregnancy cannot implant
into the uterus so this progesterone is
going to allow your body to have that
egg if it becomes fertilized and
develops into an embryo the egg gets
fertilized in your fallopian tube it has
to grow and develop into a stage of an
embryo so the SP comes along sperm swim
through the uterus into the tubes and
that's where fertilization happens okay
so the sperm comes through the fallopian
tube it meets the egg which is chilling
there chilling there and then what
happens then well hopefully
fertilization happen which is like the
sperm which is like the tadpole's head
hits the egg it's the egg it actually
has a little fusion reaction and pushes
its DNA in there pretty cool it then has
to grow and develop so you have a single
cell egg a single cell sperm they come
together you have two different DNA
components and then you start seeing
cell division just like you would expect
exponentially two cells four cells eight
cells 16 cells into the point where on
day five or six that embryo is now a
what we call a blasticus it's 300ish
cells and it is now at the stage where
it can implant into the uterus what is
so interesting is
that most your eggs are never going to
fertilize they're not going to grow
appropriately they're not going to get
into that uterus but what's so important
is that if an egg is coming in or the
embryo is coming in and there's not just
the right amount of progesterone it
cannot implant that's really important
because that's the mechanism behind a
lot of birth control but when you think
about progesterone starts being made
from this Corpus ludum perfectly timed
after you ovulate to open and close that
implantation window so that when the
embryo gets there it's ready and if the
embryo doesn't implant hangs out too
long it's going to close the Corpus
ludum only lasts for 2 weeks if it is
not supported by a pregnancy meaning if
we pretend this month you don't get
pregnant you're just having natural
periods then the Corpus ludum after two
weeks it
dies your progesterone levels are going
to drop and that's the signal to your
uterus to shed the lining in preparation
for the new group of eggs that's your
body saying we did not get pregnant this
month let's try again when a pregnancy
implants that embryo makes a hormone
called HCG which is what we check on a
pregnancy test and HCG can stimulate the
Corpus ludum to keep making progesterone
and that is what allows you to sustain
an early pregnancy until there's a
placenta the point of thinking about
that which there's a lot to go into
about optimizing intercourse and trying
to get pregnant is that things that
disrupt the brain's interpretation of
estrogen is going to impact your ability
to sense ovulation or to ovulate and
going to lead to menstrual
irregularities or absent periods like
you mentioned in some of your friends
who exercise maybe more frequently so on
one end of the spectrum if you are
intensely exercising you're training for
the Olympics you're an elite athlete
your body is going to stop sending out
FSH and LH altogether it is going to say
that the calories you're receiving to
the energy you're expending do not match
up and you cannot support being pregnant
with another human so it is going to
stop the production of FSH and LH and
you're not going to ovulate you're
probably fine because you're training
for the Olympics and you don't want to
be pregnant right now this also happens
though with eating disorders anorexia
for example we can see that I will say
when the brain is turned off when your
brain has decided that you can't be
pregnant right now it takes years of
being in recovery for it to turn back on
it has to be convinced for years that
the system system is going to be intact
again in the part of the brain that
controls if FSH and LH are released from
the pituitary called the hypothalamus so
we call this hypothalamic dysfunction I
like to think about the hypothalamus as
the you know airport control station
they're watching the planes come in and
sending out other signals it is
interpreting what your body is giving it
and then it's directing what is
happening estrogen is also made from fat
cells and this is one of the reasons why
being
overweight is so impactful when it comes
to your reproduction because if your
body is making extra
estrogen your
brain thinks an egg is on the process of
growing so it's because right the brain
thinks estrogen's only made from an egg
so if it sees some extra estrogen
because you're obese it's not going to
send out a strong enough signal to get
an egg to grow because the brain wants
to send out just enough to get the one
egg to grow it doesn't want 20 eggs to
grow so if it sees that estrogen it's
going to say ooh an egg's already
growing I'm going to send out less but
there is no egg because you're
overweight it's the fat cells making
estrogen and so exercise comes into this
play where exercising if you're
overweight can be extremely beneficial
for your fertility because if you lose
weight you drop that Baseline estrogen
level down and now your brain can more
clearly interpret this signal from the
ovary so suddenly your system is back in
check same thing for men estrogen when
men are overweight Coes to the brain and
the Brain estrogen and testosterone are
on the same conversion pathway so the
brain says oh Steven's gained some
weight I I see his estrogen he's making
enough sperm we're good and it's not
going to tell you to make as much
testosterone or as much sperm as you
need and then you get on this pathway
where you have less energy because your
testosterone is low but you're gaining
weight and you can't get that
testosterone higher you go to The Men's
Health clinic and they're going to draw
your blood and your testosterone will be
low and they're going to put you on that
trt and now your sperm Count's going to
go to zero so sometimes that entry point
to the whole problem was having extra
fat tissue so exercising to lose weight
can be very beneficial for your
fertility for men and women there's a
lot of talk on hit exercise or moderate
activity and for the regular person
whatever you will stick with is the best
if you're trying to get pregnant you
should not be trying to stress your body
to new goals training for the marathon
doing something if you think going going
to the gym every single day is that too
much no I usually say going to the gym
every single day if we think about 60
Minutes or Less is a normal amount of
inflammation from your muscles that is
good your body should encounter some
challenge along the day having more
muscle is also going to help combat
insulin resistance and other issues that
come in and interfere with our brain's
interpretation of our hormones as well
so we see that both overe exercising and
not exercising are the extremes that are
not going to be helpful for you but
moving your body in addition to helping
your hormones function better less
chance of becoming overweight better
interpretation by your brain of your
body's signals it's also a great way for
stress coping and lowering your cortisol
levels so exercise we should put there
right up there with the top thing
somebody can do get more sleep exercise
every day you mentioned menstrual cycles
there and how they can be disrupted for
long periods of time um my partner shed
quite openly um on her social media
channels her battle with this and she I
think she had a couple of dietary
changes she had some struggles with
eating and that resulted in her period
basically stopping for I think three or
four years um it's returned after sort
of three three or four years and she's
very happy about that but um lots of
people are going through irregular
period Cycles irregular menstrual
cycles what can you say to this I mean
what is what is quote unquote normal as
it relates to a normal healthy healthy
menstrual cycle into people that are
struggling what what would you advise
them and what would you tell them I love
it a normal period is one that is
regular and predictable so I'll tell a
patient you can look at a calendar and
you can say within a couple days of
certainty when you're going to have your
period now each individual person is
going to have a different cycle link
length meaning the day from the start of
your bleed that's day one of your cycle
until the last day before your next
period bleed you'll hear 28 days used a
lot that's not the average for every
single person usually it's going to be
between 24 to 35 days for the average
person can you explain this to me like
I've never heard of a menstrual cycle
before what is it what happens so the
menstrual cycle is essentially what
we've talked about with our whole eggs
right so you have your group of eggs
come out the ovary each eggs in a
follicle brain sends out follicle
stimulating hormone that egg is going to
grow develop and ovulate that's going to
put you a couple weeks into your
menstrual cycle from there it's going to
then make progesterone get you into that
back half of it that ludal phase because
the Corpus ludum is always set at two
weeks and then when you're not pregnant
you're going to bleed so bleeding is the
shutting of the lining that's your
period your ovaries are doing something
different throughout that process so
while you're bleeding and on your period
period your ovary is already starting to
grow the egg that's going to ovulate in
that month and as that egg makes
estrogen that's what stops you from
bleeding okay so when you have your
period That's the shedding of the lining
from the last month because you didn't
get pregnant and growing an egg this
month once there's enough estrogen is
going to stop that process and stabilize
that lining okay so typically when you
if if there's no other interventions if
you don't have your period it's because
you're pregnant because you're pregnant
or you didn't ovulate because you have
to have that
progesterone drop as the signal for your
body to bleed exactly so you either
problem a I didn't ovulate so that is
either I'm out of eggs I don't have any
eggs to ovulate or my brain didn't send
out the signals like we said
hypothalamic Amara that's often that OV
ex exercising or that calorie
restriction or chronic illness stress
stress sometimes I I like to think about
that one often more as hypothalamic
dysfunction like irregularity versus
absent but yes stress and then we've got
pituitary end thyroid disease prolactin
these are hormones from the pituitary
gland which is where FSH and LH come
from and if your pituitary sends a lot
of energy to making thyroid stimulating
hormone it's not going to send out FSH
quite as well and then you have
polycystic ovarian syndrome which is
going to be one of the most common
causes of female infertility and of
irregular periods and that is when your
ovary and your brain have a
miscommunication and so when we talk
about irregular Cycles because we should
dive into PCOS what we're saying is that
for one single person it's not occurring
at this regular interval for them so
maybe it's 25 days for Jill and 30 days
for Mary and 34 days for Susie but each
of those people should be able to know
when her period is coming the fertile
window for all of them is this is
different and that's why apps and cycle
tracking can be really problematic
because what the fertile window is is
going to be the 5 days before and then
the day you ovulate so an egg lives for
24 hours the five days before you
ovulate okay okay so the 5 days before
you ovulate and then the day that you
ovulate the egg lives for 24 hours it
has to be fertilized while it is in the
fallopian tube in those first 24 hours
sperm can live in the female
reproductive tract for 5 days so that is
why we will tell people to have sex
before and then during ovulation put
some of that sperm from the locker there
a little bit earlier and then get some
there right right at the time when
you're ovulating to see if you can
fertilize that
egg if we think about understanding when
your fertile window is based on your
cycle length so if we say your cycle is
the the entire process and then your
period is just the bleeding days the
entire process if your Cycles are on
average 28 days the Corpus ludum lives
14 days so 28 minus 14 you on average
would ovulate on day 14 so the 5 days
before and then day 14 are going to be
your most fertile days to try to Target
intercourse or avoid if you don't want
to be pregnant and if your Cycles are 35
days though it's very different right
because now 35 days minus 14 is going to
be 21 here you go 21 so your fertile
window or for that person is going to be
cycle day 21 so now the 5 days before
and day 21 those are very different
fertile Windows days they should be
having sex it's a lot isn't it do we
just have sex every day if we can so
absolutely like if you can have sex
every day or every other day and you
don't have to track your Cycles if they
are coming regularly and you're putting
sperm in the presence of the egg by
every day or every other day sex
absolutely and that's one of the things
that I see people do wrong the most is
have less sex in the idea that they
should save it up to put more sperm
present when the egg is arriving I have
to say I mean there's a few things I
wanted to say about this so I think
what's the first thing I wanted to say
the first thing I want to to ask is how
long on average do different age groups
need to try before they hit the Bull's
Eye if you're age 30 and you're trying
to get pregnant you have a 20% chance of
pregnancy per month okay this means that
the majority of people should be
pregnant within 6 months infertility is
defined as trying for a year and not
getting pregnant within that year so
kind of going off the curve of that
standard deviation importantly trying to
get pregnant means that you're having
intercourse you're ejaculating inside
and you're having regular periods if
you're not able to complete the active
intercourse and you're not having
regular periods people should not wait x
amount of time to come see a doctor you
should go be seen right away when my
friends tell me that they've started
trying I always think God that doesn't
doesn't that just ruin the fun you know
what I mean because I have this one
friend who was telling me that um
because they're trying now sex has
become such a like chore like a chore
and if he's away when she's most fertile
then she gets annoyed at him and I just
think God it's so crazy what's happening
with sex in that regard that it's we're
now because we're having kids later and
later and we're leaving things a little
bit later than ever before we're now
having to treat making kids almost like
as you say like a chore it's becoming
like I don't know there's something
about that I'm like oh gosh like well
it's a point because if you're waiting
later and you still want to have more
than one child there's a lot of pressure
on it if you're starting at 35 and you
have that 10 to 15% chance per month if
you're starting at 38 and now it's 5 to
8% per month if you're 40 it's 3 to 5%
isn't pressure like the opposite of sex
right it doesn't sound very fun I think
that one having realistic goals is
helpful because if you're trying to
start your family at 37 and you want
four kids it is very unlikely to happen
without intervention like IVF saving
embryos for the future which we can
absolutely do and we do that for people
sometimes so that they can go have fun
with their sex life again two you feel
like you have to track your cycles and
time intercourse appropriately when
you're older because there's so much
that you can't do right you only have so
many eggs you only have so much time and
you're trying to do what you can
understand your cycle tracking for a
woman is a reflection of her full health
how's your brain interpreting your
entire body so it is helpful because if
you have irregularity it is a sign that
things are not working normally that
being said regular sex is good for so
many reasons and in a relationship that
if you can establish sex more frequently
as just part of your relationship it
becomes less burdensome that you're here
recording a podcast at this time or
somebody's out of town this one given
month if we remember that sex or if we
remember that sperm live in the female
reproductive tract for up to 5 days most
of sperm is going to live there for two
to three days so five is kind of like
the longest it can what we have is that
okay have sex two or three times a week
what what about couples that can't
because I I've sat here and interviewed
so many sex therapists and sexologists
if that's even a thing and we often
speak about sexlessness people having
sex less and less than ever before
because they're so busy and they're so
stressed in their lives and you must
meet so many couples in your practice
that you know you you look at them and
go well really the problem here is
you're just not having sex with each
other 100% and sometimes it's
situational truck drivers Pilots there's
just a job where it is too hard to have
that intercourse during the fertile
window but then also yeah High
performing people or who just don't
prioritize or don't enjoy that part of
the relationship we certainly do what we
call IUI or intrauterine insemination
and this is where you take the sperm and
you're putting it inside the uterus so
instead of intercourse we are taking an
ejaculated sample and then processing it
and putting it in the uterus wait so yes
I could just ejaculate in a Petri dish
get get a little pet and I mean you
can't do it yourself but why Well
because most of the ejaculate of your
sperm is actually meant to protect the
sperm from the acidity of the vagina so
most of that is not ever going to see
the inside of a uterus and if we put the
whole sample up in the uterus it would
cause a huge inflammatory or infectious
process but if we clean that sample and
we pel it out centrifuge it and get just
the sperm we can then put the sperm into
the uterus and avoid having all that
protective ejaculate sample with it you
must hear couples doing this kind of
thing people do the craziest things tell
me about some of the crazy things people
do crazy things I mean definitely people
are having intercourse and then they're
putting they're putting tampons in
afterwards to try to keep the sperm in
place or diaphragm cups people are
trying to get their own versions of
pipets or turkey basters right that's
what people call it and try to pull up
sperm
and put just put in their vagina the
craziest stories of sperm procurement
come from people who are using donor
sperm as you may not know there is an
entire like dark web of sperm donation
being connected on Facebook groups and
other places is where people are not
going down traditional roads of using a
sperm bank a sperm bank pros and cons
but if you're using sperm if you're
using donor sperm a sperm bank is going
through a process to make sure there's
no infectious material in there that the
information is tested that there's
limitations But ultimately like legally
too that that is your sample these
Facebook groups people are just
connecting where you can meet in a
Walmart parking lot and drop somebody
your sperm out of the goodness of your
heart so that they can get pregnant and
there was a case in Oklahoma where there
was a lesbian couple who wanted some
sperm in their relationship and they
felt like going through the fertility
clinic or buying donor sperm from the
sperm bank was too expensive because it
is expensive and so they found a sperm
donor how much is it roughly for some I
have no idea so purchasing a violet
sperm itself is about $1,000 and then
each cycle goal with a clinic to kind
get the sperm inside is typically going
to be $1 to $2,000 so that's for each
month you're going to look at 2 to 3,000
and your chance of it working is based
on your age so if you're 35 it's about
10 to 15% so you're going to need to do
it numerous times so this couple in
Oklahoma they found a sperm donor on a
Facebook group went and conceived a
child and despite having some paper
document they signed saying that he gave
them their rights he sued for custody of
that child later and and won so they now
split custody with their sperm donor and
I think that this is why he changed his
mind he had who knows well he didn't get
he didn't get paid for this right so it
was out of the goodness of his heart he
just met them and gave the sample so
part of the issue too is that it's not a
exchange of a service for for a fee or a
good right it's just you're giving the
sperm so I believe in that case he said
he interpreted that was the situation
and they said of course it wasn't but
when we look at Family building a lot of
people are using what we call third
party options so donor X donor sperm
gational carriers donor embryos even and
there's a whole world to go into there
but protecting somebody's parental
rights is one of the top things that I'm
always thinking about when it comes to
helping them grow a family we were
talking about PCOS yes what I've I've
got a very close friend of mine that
struggled a lot with PCOS and I've been
there with them um as they've been
diagnosed and as they've kind of battled
with that over the years but I'm aware
that a lot of people struggle with PCOS
I think it's up to sort of 20% of the
population so officially people will say
that it's about 10 to 133% of the
population but that's 70% of people who
have PCOS are undiagnosed so much higher
than either of those numbers you I said
is going to be the real number and what
is
PCOS there's a couple different ways
that PCOS presents so how I like to
describe PCOS in essence is being born
with more eggs in your Vault okay so if
you're born with more eggs in your Vault
you are going to send out more eggs
every single month right because you're
sending out eggs in proportion to how
many you have why do you have pcus
likely this is due to something your
mother did when she was pregnant with
you or something she was exposed to
because you didn't have that normal
decline in eggs from 6 to 7 million at 5
months to 1 to 2 million at 9 months so
you have more eggs more eggs come out of
the Vault every month the brain doesn't
know you have more eggs so it is sending
out the same amount of FSH as it
normally would for a normal egg count
but that FSH is getting diluted amongst
the more eggs that have come out if we
can imagine the same signal is going to
20 eggs or it's going to 30 eggs so FSH
is the thing that basically picks the
egg yeah it's like food for the egg okay
the thing that selects the one egg and
gives it um Waters it like a plant
exactly so you have the same amount
coming but there's more eggs eating it
so nobody's getting a strong enough
signal to grow reliably predictably
meaning you're not going to have that
regular predictable cycle when an egg
grows that's when your body makes
estrogen that's when your ovary makes
estrogen and the ovary is a hormon
producing Factory everybody thinks about
the ovary as oh it's what makes the eggs
but its real job Its Real Love Is to
make hormones it makes estrogen as it
grows the egg it makes progesterone
after you ovulate if you have too many
small eggs come out of the Vault there's
not enough FSH to stimulate any of them
the ovary is not making estrogen and it
gets bored so what happens is the
pathway to make
testosterone becomes upregulated it
starts making testosterone in its boor
time what testosterone does in women
with PCOS is it then increases the risk
of insulin resistance it increases
abdominal weight so not that maybe like
female body shape we think about like
weight on the hips and thighs but more
of that man beer belly style abdominal
weight you also then are going to have
increase in acne facial hair and then
even male pattern baldness so you start
to see that you have these Androgen
symptoms that are negatively impacting
quality of life immensely and then as
you gain weight the estrogen confuses
the brain and it sends out even less FSH
so you get into to this really cyclic
pathway where the insulin resistance and
the testosterone change your entire
body's
metabolism but you're not going to go in
and make yourself have less eggs so how
do you combat
PCOS one way from if you're trying to
get pregnant is to try to give
medications that have the brain send out
a stronger signal of FSH so you might
have heard of medications like Clomid or
lrel these medications tell the brain to
send out more FSH so in essence that's
what we call ovulation induction helping
somebody ovulate by having the brain
send out a stronger signal but what we
try to do if you're in this PCOS pathway
is break down some of the production of
testosterone from the ovary stop that
cycle and try to see if you can reverse
back into having healthier normal Cycles
so sometimes that's from medications
like metformin you can have
spironolactone which is a medication
that stops testosterone produ ction this
is why women with PCS are given birth
control pills because birth control
pills one can come in and provide
estrogen and progesterone but two they
also make something in the liver called
sex hormone binding globulin that binds
to testosterone drops your testosterone
levels and clinically they make you feel
better your acne goes away some of those
Androgen signs go down and it can help
break the pattern and I see that people
with PCOS when they come off the birth
control pill they actually ovulate more
regularly at the beginning and then it
starts to get worse as more time goes on
as their androgens start to rise back up
to their Baseline because the birth
control pill was keeping them down so
focusing on some of the other factors
that really influence insulin resistance
and hormone production and
PCOS PCOS patients I always tell my
patients it's it's like a teeter totter
of balance meaning when you're too
stressed or or you're exposed to
something it can tip your hormones into
not ovulating so you have to view that
system as just very sensitive extra
stressors like the cortisol that's
coming in really influence people with
PCOS a lot as does being overweight and
that's why there's a lot of information
on trying to encourage PCS patients who
are overweight to lose weight
importantly not all women with PC are
overweight you definitely can be thin be
born with a lot of eggs inside Vault and
have the exact same problem and I want
to stress that some people even if you
live the healthiest life you don't ever
see inflammation you're not stressed but
you have PCOS it's a disease and you may
not ever get to a place where you can
reliably or regularly ovulate in your
reproductive years that you're wanting
to and that's not your fault it's not a
failure of you it's not your fault some
people truly do need intervention to try
to help them get pregnant and there's
interventions are freezing their eggs
IVF those kinds of things yep ovulation
induction freezing your eggs
IVF when you scan the ovaries can you
see PCOS mm PCOS is diagnosed by having
two out of three criteria so number one
seeing a lot of eggs on ultrasound yeah
number two having high Androgen signs so
whether it's a blood value of
testosterone that's higher than a normal
female should have or just having acne
or hair growth M and then then three is
irregularity or absent periods so two
out of the three of them so if you have
irregular periods and acne you've met
the diagnostic criteria what causes PCOS
you talked about maybe it's something
your mother might have done but there's
a lot of thought that PCOS is
largely genetic or epigenetic meaning
that when you're a baby inside your mom
that that environment influenced a lot
of how your OV is going to function
later and there's a huge correlation
between different exposure or whether it
is insulin resistance and pregnancy and
then women being born later in life with
a higher risk of PCOS
certainly you can back into PCOS by by
being overweight and what I mean by that
is often patients will present they'll
be diagnosed with PCOS but the ideolog
is a little bit different if you're very
obese that fat is going to make estrogen
the brain is going to send out less FSH
you're not going to be ovulating because
it's not a strong enough signal and the
ovaries are going to start making
testosterone because they're bored so
you have a PCOS
presentation but that mechanism is not
really necessarily having a large number
of eggs in your Vault when we have
syndromes we have to remember polycystic
ovarian syndrome syndromes are based on
the symptoms you present with so often
syndromes do have different Origins for
how they present is there a way to
completely heal from polycystic ovary
syndrome
for some people yes but have you seen
that yes I have seen people but most of
it correlates with an all women at some
point you're still losing eggs every
month right so at some point you are
going to get to a number where the eggs
that are coming out of the Vault are a
number that the brain is going to
respond to so what's interesting is I'll
have people say I cured my PCOS and I
say well really you just are age 38 and
at this point you don't have enough
remaining eggs to to ca cause this
dysfunctional problem anymore the eggs
that are coming out are now responsive
to your hormones yes they did do
lifestyle changes and improve things and
probably made it so that their ovaries
could respond to those signals so I
think it goes together but PCOS women
still go through menopausa the same age
they're born with more eggs and they go
through menopause at the same age so
what's happening is they're simply just
losing eggs at a more rapid Pace because
they have more and what impact does that
have on your ability to get pregnant
when you have more eggs and number one
is what we call an ovulation so the
irregular periods or lack of having a
period altogether that is one of the top
causes of infertility and certainly PCOS
is the top cause of that it's important
to say that not having a period is not
normal so if you're taking birth control
or contraception we'll just put that in
a different category for a minute but if
you're not taking any hormones and
you're not having a period it is
extremely bad for your health on both
ends and what what I mean by this is
It's either because your body has PCOS
and has all of these little follicles
making a tiny bit of estrogen each day
and in that
scenario you're not making your normal
hormones but also you're at risk for
metabolic disease high blood pressure
cholesterol diabetes but also that
constant estrogen production even though
it's not high levels but it's enough to
confuse the brain is stimulating the
lining of the uterus to grow and if you
never ovulate you don't make
progesterone so there's never the signal
to shed or to bleed the lining cancer
cancer so endometrial cancer is a very
significant risk in women with PCOS who
do not have periods and this is why you
will see people come in and say that you
need to take progesterone or you must be
on birth control pills because we've got
to give you that progesterone in some
form or fashion to bleed off those cells
so that they don't develop into cancer
so there must be a pretty strong link
then between PCOS and in demetrial
cancer uterine cancer yes if you think
about the other end of when people are
not having periods so I'm exercising and
I lost my periods for 3 to four years
you're not making any estrogen during
that time your brain shut off those FSH
signals the ovary never made estrogen
from those eggs and having low estrogen
is detrimental to your long-term Health
we see this even when women go through
menopause at the normal age right
suddenly you now have an increased risk
of heart disease stroke osteoporosis
dementia Alzheimer's once you've entered
menopause because estrogen was
protective against all of those if you
had that estrogen or that lack of
estrogen even earlier in life those
risks especially bone disease
osteoporosis hip fractures later in life
they can be extremely high so it's very
important that women know that if you're
not having periods that it's harmful for
your full body Health very often I see
young women their 20 say I'm not having
a period but who wants to bleed every
month anyway so not a big deal but their
brain's not functioning as great as it
can having estrogen helps the brain
think sharp and be productive and if
you're constantly lacking estrogen
you're going to be fatigued feel cloudy
you're not going to feel like yourself
replacing
estrogen in somebody whose ovaries are
not making it whether it's because the
brain's not sending the signals to or
you're simply out of eggs early
replacing estrogen is extremely
important for your quality of life and
your longevity you mentioned a word
earlier that I've not heard
before
endometriosis endometriosis yes what is
this endometriosis is essentially an
inflammatory autoimmune condition so we
already talked about I've said
endometrium a couple times do you know
what endometrium is no so the
endometrium is the lining of the uterus
so it is what grows in preparation for
that pregnancy to implant and it is what
bleeds when somebody has a period you're
shedding the endometrium okay so it's
that inside portion of the uterus in
every single person they bleed some of
those cells are going to migrate out the
Fallopian tubes which is pretty normal
if you can imagine the uterus is
Contracting it's squeezing some of those
cells are going to migrate out and in
cells from the endometrium endometrium
some of the cells from the endometrium
in addition to bleeding as that uterus
is Contracting you know the tubal
opening to the top some of the cells are
going to come out the Fallopian tubes
and that's that's normal okay so if I go
and do an appendectomy I take out
somebody's appendix while she's on her
period I'm going to see menstrual blood
in her abdominal cavity and that's
totally normal what is abnormal about
endometriosis is that your body has an
abnormal reaction to that and instead of
saying oh Natalie's on her period no big
deal your body would say oh my gosh
there's blood in here it's foreign cells
attack attack attack and so it becomes a
process where every time a woman is on
her period the body starts to attack
these cells and then because it is
endometrial tissue it's responsive to
estrogen so it grows with every
ovulatory cycle every follicle you make
it's characterized by inflammation and
inflammation is what causes pain so very
painful periods is the Hallmark of the
disease although importantly not
everybody who has Indo has pain pain
with intercourse is another one
especially in certain positions so not
pain with like insertion or penetration
but but deep pain so he's like oh the
classic is when a patient will tell me I
don't like being on top it's painful
inside because of the angle that
intercourse is happening it is where she
has these implants of endometriosis
inside her body these inflammatory
implants endometriosis because it causes
inflammation makes the environment more
toxic so the number one way that all
autoimmune disease is contributing to
infertility is by this inflammatory
process which is just toxic to cell
growth and toxic to early embryo growth
and we see infertility rates and higher
miscarriage rates in Demetrio is as
inflammation lives there can also turn
into scar so you can have destruction of
the internal anatomy and total blockage
of the flan tubes so it can go from an
inflammatory process to also a complete
destructive and obstructive
process it is only a surgical diagnosis
and that's one of the hardest things is
that you can't just say I'm going to run
a blood test and see if you have
endometriosis we don't know what markers
to cheuck in your blood yet so the only
way to diagnos the disease is by looking
doing surgery putting a camera in
somebody's abdomen and physically seeing
these endometriosis
implants the hard thing is sorry just on
the point of surgery where does the
camera go in the camera goes in through
the belly button so that's called
laparoscopy so you put a camera in
through the belly button inflate the
abdomen and you can go and see what is
going on and so somebody who's got very
significant pain your period pain should
not impact your quality of life to the
point that you want to cancel plans not
participate in your normal activities if
you're canceling dinner not going to
school those are not normal findings and
if that is the level of pain somebody is
experiencing I'm very concerned that she
could have
endometriosis many people don't ever go
to surgery and get that diagnosis and
that's okay too if we think we have it
or your doctor's approaching it in a
certain way because by the time that you
can even diagnose it the damage is done
the inflammation is there you've been
living with it and one of the hardest
things for us with
endometriosis treatment of the disease
there's treatment but I have to stop you
from ovulating because estrogen will
always stimulate even if there's one
little cell so if you're trying to get
pregnant you have to ovulate so the
treatment for the disease does not allow
you to get pregnant and be treated so if
you stop that and you're trying to get
pregnant each ovulatory month the
disease is progressively getting worse
so it's one of these places where it is
very tough because we don't want people
suffering in pain but also getting
pregnant is so difficult in those
circumstances
in prevalence of endometriosis we say is
about 10% of all women in fertility
clinics patients with infertility it's a
30 to 50% prevalence so in my mind
there are a ton of people walking around
with endometriosis or inflammation who
do not know that they have it this is
why that falls into the category of
sometimes what we call unexplained
infertility somebody has regular periods
because endometriosis does not impact
your period pattern it might cause pain
but nothing about that process is
interfering with your brain and your
ovary communicating and your ovulatory
pattern so you're still having regular
periods
and you're having sex even if it's
painful but you're not getting
pregnant that there's something else
going on and so a lot of patients with
endometriosis end up having to come to
the fertility clinic and many of them
end up going through IVF because it is
one of the only ways we can change the
environment of which EG and sperm meet
is to allow them to meet in a
non-inflammatory environment in an IVF
lab I can then drop your inflammation
and treat your indom rosis and then put
an embryo back inside because I don't
need you to ovulate as a part of that
process so IVF controls So Many Factors
at once because I take the eggs I grow
them I take them out of the body now I
can fertilize them in the lab in that
perfect environment with the perfect
temperature and pH grow that embryo I
can then have you have a period and
suppress your endometriosis I don't care
that you're not ovulating now cuz I can
give you some estrogen and grow the
lining and then just put the embryo back
in at the right day and I can see
wonderful success rates with that with
patients with endometriosis just on that
point you said about you'll give them a
medication that suppresses the cycle and
but it stops the pain could you be on
that medication for say 5 10 years and
then come off it when you want to get
start getting
pregnant yes and no one thing that's
very interesting so a good example of
one medication not our drug of choice
but one thing that's used for
endometriosis is the combined birth
control pill the birth control pill is
estrogen and progesterone if you're
taking that pill your brain is no longer
ovulating because it's seeing estrogen
and that's not the same estrogen that
the ovaries make so it's not the type of
estrogen that stimulates those
endometriosis cells women who've been on
the birth control pill for prolonged
periods of time do not have diminished
fertility when they come off of the pill
and in fact most of them have higher
fertility rates than their age Rel ated
peers who were never on the pill and if
we think about it the hypothesis is that
if you suppressed ovulation for 10 years
versus your best friend who didn't and
you both had
endometriosis you are now starting your
ovulatory cycles and you put a pause in
the development of your endometriosis
it's not going to get rid of it no
medication's going to reverse the
process or treat it per se like cure it
but we can halt it from getting worse
and so if you're on the birth control
pill or you're on a medication called
Lupron there's some different options
that essentially stop the body from
ovulating therefore you're not
progressively letting that Indo get
worse and then you do have higher rates
of success when you come off of that
than people who are your age who weren't
so that's one strategy if you know you
have it you have to know you have the
disease or have a high suspicion that
you do in order to be preventing
ovulation all those months someone comes
to you and they've been diagnosed with
endometriosis what is your first sort of
Port of Call for them what's the first
piece of advice you you'd give them or
the first suggestion you'd make
medically or otherwise yeah so for real
honest talk about how old they are how
many kids they want we know that women
with endometriosis run out of eggs at a
faster pathway because endometriosis is
inflammatory and destroys the eggs
inside the Vault so you're going to run
out of eggs EGS faster I want four kids
how old are you I'm 25 that's okay so
when do you want to start trying to have
them let's say 30 say 30 and you want a
large number of children well I want to
know how everything is Right This Minute
right so we're going to check your
ovarian reserve we're going to make sure
that we're not already on a pathway of
accelerated destruction because if we
already have a low egg count now now is
the time to intervene egg freezing or
embryo freezing meaning taking some of
those eggs out so I can save them for
later when I know you're going to have a
hard time also setting different
parameters for the Endo patient I don't
let somebody who has endometriosis just
pull the goalie and try when they're
ready to get pregnant I'm going say we
know you have something that increases
the odds that you're going to have a
hard time so are your fallopian tubes
open how is your partner sperm I want
that data before you start trying to get
pregnant the traditional mentality to
infertility is so reactive you have to
prove to me you have a problem before I
go and test it that's the classic
mentality you got to try for a year
before we'll go test these different
variables of course we're challenging
that narrative and we're saying no go
get tested beforehand but an endo
patient is 100% somebody who should same
with the patient with PCOS you're not an
average person on the street you have a
medical diagnosis that is significantly
associated with infertility you need to
approach roach your family planning
Journey differently you need to test all
the variables we can before you start
trying to conceive and we need to have
an honest talk about your family size
because if you want four kids and you
start at age 30 and you have no problems
and you have your kids really closely
together so you what 30
32 when's your next one 35 36 when are
you having baby four you're you're
pushing 38 to 40 and we know that rates
are going to be harder because you're
going to have more genetically abnormal
eggs at that age so a lot of people
don't even talk about this stuff do they
like in terms if you use that word
Family Planning I think really that's at
the heart of what's missing here is we
don't do Family Planning we do like
family reaction yeah we're like oh crap
no family and then oh my God I want to
have a family I want here's what I say
to somebody who has will say PCOS or
endometriosis and they want to have a
bigger family and they're not quite
ready to start but let's say they have a
partner this is the perfect opportunity
to do what we call embryo banking so
it's very similar to to egg freezing but
it's IVF so it means right now I'm going
to get a group of your eggs to grow
we're going to go through the IVF
process IVF is in vitro fertilization so
one month's group of eggs I'm going to
get them all to grow people with PCOS
are fabulous candidates for this because
they have so many eggs the ROI on that
investment is very high because number
of eggs and age are the two most
important factors I'm going to get that
month of eggs to grow I'm going to take
them out of the body I'm going to
fertilize them with sperm grow out
embryos and I can do genetic testing to
see which ones are chromosomally normal
and they can stay in the freezer until
you're ready for them what well I can
what I can you can put fertilized eggs
in the freezer yeah those are embryos
you can put embo embryos in the freezer
yes sir and that is going to allow us to
change the trajectory of somebody who
wants four kids and isn't starting till
2 33 because now naturally having that
fourth baby becomes statistically very
unprobable in order to have four
children most people will need to start
before age 28 now that's not everybody
but most people so if you want that big
family because that's like we said a
child to person it's a whole different
life you're going to have with that
person in it then we need to say hey
well that's a lot easier to go through
IVF right now freeze those embryos then
start trying to get pregnant what's the
difference between me freezing eggs and
sperm versus freezing the embryos so
this is a good point so freezing embryos
even if you're going to try to naturally
get pregnant later is helping you know
that you can tap into those embryos you
know later in life so versus doing IVF
at age 39 where you have less eggs and
the vast majority are abnormal you're
making those embryos now where they're
much better the process for the woman is
exactly the same whether you're freezing
eggs or embryos you are taking shots of
FSH to get one month's group of eggs to
grow that takes about two weeks and then
we do a quick procedure to take the eggs
out of the body under anesthesia so none
of that is different what happens is the
differen is in the eggs I always say if
you're freezing eggs it is not an
insurance policy on your fertility an
insurance policy pays off when something
bad happens this is an investment you're
playing the stock market is it smart to
put your money in Investments does it
usually pay off well it depends on the
environment when you go to pull that
money out eggs are potential
opportunities it's
fantastic and it's much better than
nothing but it's not giving us all of
the information because even if the
sperm looks normal and even if the eggs
look normal the real proof of the
pudding is seeing how the embryos grow
and develop because not every egg is
going to fertilize become an embryo or
be genetically normal and even every
genetically normal embryo is not going
to become a baby so if I take an average
person who is age 30 and let's say we
get 20 eggs from going through egg
freezing that is fantastic you feel
super egg Rich that sounds awesome now
if we make them into embryos or when we
go make them into embryos you do often
lose some eggs in the freeze thaw of the
eggs eggs are a single cell mostly
filled with like liquid like water and
then DNA and embryo is 300 to 500 cells
when we freeze it so embryos are much
much stronger they survive over 99% of
the time egg freezing I told you earlier
it wasn't available 10 years ago when I
was your age because eggs didn't survive
the free we were trying it but they're
so fragile it just took a while to get
the tech there eggs now survive 90% of
the time going through the free saww
which is great way better than 40% but
it's also not 100 so we have to kind of
account for that loss in our equation so
if I have 20 eggs now I go to thaw them
whenever we're ready and now I have two
that don't survive so I have 18 I'm
going to go inject them with the perfect
sperm and I would have on average
fertilization rates of about 75 to 80%
so let's say 14 of them fertilize half
of those are not going to make it to an
implantation stage embryo even if
everything's perfect so now I have seven
that have made it to an implantation
stage embryo and then my proportion of
normal is based on my age so if I'm 30
I'm pretty good because i' about 60 to
70% normal if I'm 35 it's about
50/50 if I'm 38 it's a third normal if
I'm 40 it's about 20 to 25% normal so
you can see how that number of eggs that
you have and the outcome differs for the
30-year-old the seven embryos if
everything falls perfect she should have
four normal
embryos but that's if everything falls
perfect and what if it doesn't what if
our ferti I ization rates are lower or
not as many embryos grow through the
process average means that some people
do better than average and some people
do below and we don't know that about an
individual couple until we put them
through the process how many embryos can
I put in the freezer you can put as many
as you want if you're trying to optimize
your chance of success you're going to
want two to three genetically normal
embryos for every child that you want to
have in the future one genetically
normal embryo put inside a body has a
65% chance of live birth and what a is
there an age component to whether the
embryo will be successful so if if my
partner put one of those embryos out the
freezer into her at 45 are the odds
still the same up until 45 yes after 45
you start to see a decline but still
ultimately quite successful I need to
get some of these bloody embryos in the
freezer yes so cumulatively after two
embryos are put inside not at once so I
put one transfer or you're not pregnant
and then you do the second one 88% of
people have had a live birth and after
three uplate embryos it's 95% of people
95% of people that means that the number
one reason why people don't have success
with IVF is they don't have enough
genetically normal embryos nothing about
failure to implant or these other
factors but that they didn't have enough
the problem with eggs is if I have 20
eggs in the freezer how many embryos do
I have you don't know yet I'm making a
whole lot of assumptions yeah and what's
the the cost difference of freezing eggs
it is about half as much to freeze eggs
as in
okay so if you don't have a partner
obviously eggs are the way to go
sometimes in somebody who has very low
ovarian reserve and they only have a
limited amount of funds it makes sense
to do eggs because I could get five eggs
and five eggs and have 10 eggs and even
if I don't know the outcome of it if
that's all the money you had to spend it
was better served to get two months
worth than to make embryos and find out
that I have maybe one normal how much
does this cost on average we'll say egg
freezing is going to be about 10,000 and
IVF is going to be about 20,000 okay I
don't know the the UK equivalent for
that but um chat GPT is telling us that
on average IVF in the UK is about £3,500
and in the US it's about $10,000 IVF is
$20,000 $220,000 genetic testing yes
freezing the eggs yes how much does that
cost it's about half as much and that
makes sense because you're doing about
half the process you're still growing
the eggs taking them the body freezing
them you'll have to pay the second cost
eventually but it's easier to spend your
future money than your current money and
do you have to pay yearly to keep them
in the fridge you do have to pay annual
storage fees how much is that on average
it depends typically it's between 500 to
$1,500 a year we have to talk about the
stigma around IVF we've talked about
stigma a few times and I I can imagine
that a lot of people when they hear
about freezing your eggs and IVF
especially people who are maybe in their
early 30s or in their late 20s they will
reject the idea because of the stigma
that that means you're broken and that's
not natural and we've got to do it like
this and in the movies it happens like
this on Instagram and with that couple
over there they just had sex and then
little Bernie was born like you know all
of that stuff and I think a lot of that
stuff actually gets in the way of even
the conversation in the first place I
think um I had this conversation with my
partner but I I was scared to have the
conversation because turning to my
partner and going hey babe I think we
should you should freeze your eggs and I
should it's there it's like loaded with
a bunch of it's a bunch of feelings yeah
yeah yeah but the truth is that beat one
as a couple beat on the same page is so
important so that conversation that you
had I'm so proud of you because so
people don't have it and I'm the first
person to ask them how many kids do you
want what does our family size look like
and people have never had that
conversation so it makes it very
difficult for Family Planning there's a
huge stigma about going through
fertility treatments having infertility
freezing your eggs the whole gamut a lot
of that is because stigma often comes
from things that are unknown or
uncertain so simply by having these
conversations and talking about it more
that is so impactful and breaking the
stigma because we start to normalize
these terms and
understand for
women time matters and yes there's going
to be stories of people who are able to
wait later and get pregnant and that's
wonderful 3% is not no nobody but is
that likely to be you and that's the
question I always say it's a very
inefficient way to try to achieve a life
goal let's have a life goal of ours and
settle for something that's going to
give you a 3% chance of success that
doesn't make any sense to me once upon a
time if you had a business idea it was
exceptionally difficult to get going but
now in the age of Shopify it is
exceptionally easy as many of you will
know Shopify are a sponsor of this
podcast if you don't know Shopify it's
an exceptionally simple web platform for
anybody that's got an idea that wants to
transact on a global scale so things
like these conversation cards which we
sell we've sold using Shopify and it
only took us a couple of clicks to get
going so why did we choose Shopify for a
number of reasons but I think one of the
big ones which goes an appreciated is
their checkout system converts 36%
better compared to other platforms and
what I'm going to do to remove the cost
for you if you go to shopify.com Bartlet
you'll be able to try Shopify for $1 do
a month I've seen Shopify completely
change people's lives and for many of
you I think it could change
yours it's also a unavoidable reality of
the world we live in I was reading the
Time Magazine and it says that in 1970
the average US woman had her first baby
age 21 and this increased to age 27 by
2022 so the time that we typically have
our first baby has increased by six
years most people are having it in their
late 20s having their first baby in
their late 20s that's again a
consequence of the social factors we
talked about so because of this there's
always trade-offs in life right there
are we want longer careers and we want
more quote unquote freedom in you know
early seasons of our life then there's
going to be a a trade-off well the
trade-off shouldn't be that you have one
less human in your family that you want
it might just be that you have to do
something different to make sure that
goal is achieved you said in um a recent
podcast you did that studies tell us
that if you're not ready to have a
family by 20 sorry 32 or
33 then that is the optimal time for the
average person to intervene and start
freezing their eggs it is and it comes
from the way that study was based on the
odds of you when you'd be likely to
start trying to conceive and the rate of
infertility coupled with the rate of
decline in count an egg quality as you
get older than that certainly your eggs
are better quality and you have more of
them younger than that so if you know
you want to freeze your eggs do not wait
until you're 32 but if you are
approaching that age and want to have
children as a life goal and you're not
ready to have them now you need to go
see a fertility doctor period the end
and what I mean by that is maybe you
freeze your eggs and maybe you don't but
you owe it to yourself to be the one to
make the decision and you can't make
make it unless you understand how many
eggs do I have are things normal for me
and evaluate that information hear about
what the process will be like you can
choose to not do it but then you made
the choice and the risk of regret is
going to be lower in the future if you
actively made the choice versus I didn't
know and I never got the chance IVF
simply is extracting an egg and a sperm
injecting the sperm into the egg and
basically putting it back inside the
woman that's the simplified version for
dummies yes so IVF in vitro
fertilization we're fertilizing the egg
outside the body so in vitro is in glass
but in the lab in the P tree dish now
modern IVF we are taking one month's
group of eggs growing them to embryos
and doing genetic testing and we're
freezing them what are you testing them
for we're testing them for chromosome
number what we call anupy as we talked
about the chromosomes getting out of
line as you get older you can check the
number of chromosomes the presence or
absence of each chromosome in a five to
eight cell sample from the embryo biopsy
to make sure they're
healthy we'll use healthy as the embryo
needs to be genetically normal it needs
to have the right number of chromosomes
to have the highest potential for
success if you're missing a full
chromosome that's going to end up in a
miscarriage if you have extra
chromosomes like an extra or copy of
chromosome 21 is Down syndrome that
carries its own risks and many of those
are pregnancy loss as well so we're
looking for what we call a upid embryo a
genetically normal meaning it has the
right number of chromosomes importantly
IVF can also be used to eliminate
genetic diseases that can be extremely
impactful when we talk about genetic
testing the way that I just defined it
testing for euploidy you have more eggs
that are genetically abnormal as you ate
that's one of the top barriers to
getting pregnant but if you and your
partner both carry cystic fibrosis for
example that's a disease that you are
going to exhibit the characteristics of
if you have a copy of the gene from Mom
and a copy of the gene from Dad you have
about a 25% chance of having a child who
would be severely ill or sick with
cystic fibrosis we can make a probe for
where your cystic fibrosis mutation is
on chromosome 7 and then we can apply
that probe to that sample that's been
biopsied from the embryo and find out
which
embryos have zero one or two copies of
that mutation essentially not
transferring the ones that are going to
result in the disease State and for
lethal abnormalities this is huge and
then for autosomal dominant diseases
like Huntington's disease or cancer
hearing syndromes you can eliminate that
from the family line do you then put one
embryo into the woman at a time we do
and so this has changed over time and I
think this is where a lot of
misconceptions come from IVF if we can
imagine the world where I have a
40-year-old with four Frozen embryos if
I've done genetic testing on them I
would know that she has one normal and I
would just go put that normal one in
before genetic testing existed she had
the same four embryos but I didn't know
which one was normal so her odds of
pregnancy for a single Embryo transfer
work much much lower so it was common
place to put more embryos in then to try
to up the odds that you'd capture the
normal one now that we know which
embryos are genetically normal we want
to transfer one embryo at a time and I
always say it's don't make them compete
for resources let that embryo have the
full surface area of the uterus to have
a really nice placenta to grow into
decrease the chance of loss or pregnancy
complication down the road interestingly
if you transfer to embryos of course you
have a higher chance of twins you don't
see much of a change in the pregnant
rate just the Twining rate but even
without transferring to embryos a single
Embryo
transfer significantly increases the
chance of identical twinning now overall
it's still very low but identical
twinning where one embryo splits so you
have two children who are genetically
the same in nature that happens at about
a half a percent in IVF it happens
closer to 2 to 3% of the time probably
just because of that embryo being loaded
into a a catheter maybe its external
surface is touched in some way makes it
more predisposed to split after we put
it inside the body that's still
ultimately a very low odds of it
happening but if you put it in context
of I do 400 embryo transfers a year then
I'm going to definitely see some
patients who are having identical
twinning from a single Embryo transfer
also you know importantly justifying
just putting one in at a time because if
you put two in and one of them split or
both of them split you could have
triplets or
quadruplets if we talk about doing it
the old fashioned way yeah you know sex
there's a lot of misconceptions around
how to increase our odds of getting
pregnant you hear about women putting
their legs in the air after sex or um
things like
uh people think if you go for a Wei then
you're going to we out all the sperm and
that's not going to make you pregnant um
are any of these things true there's so
many myths when it comes to trying to
get pregnant the good old fashioned way
with intercourse so certainly we can go
through a few of them one of them we
already touched on which is oh you
should save up sperm for when you're
ovulating so we see that sometimes men
will ejaculate less or couples will
actually not have sex trying to save up
for that exact day of ovulation but
there's no need to do that as we know we
want to clear the pipes to keep the
sperm coming out healthy and alive and
not have dead sperm and that you can
have sperm survive in the productive
track for up to 5 days so you want to be
having intercourse up until that
ovulatory day so every other day sex
everyday sex every 3-day sex those are
all fine nobody ever needs to have less
sex so if you and your partner have sex
every day please don't have less sex
because you're trying to get pregnant
number two the sperm are inside the
Fallopian tubes within minutes they have
gone from the vagina gotten through that
seminal fluid in the ejaculate through
the the cervix through the uterus and
into the fallopian tube within minutes
under five minutes so there's no need to
prop your hips up on a pillow for 30
minutes or put your feet in the air
truly the sperm are into the cervix
within 2 minutes and the cervix is where
they then sit for up to the five days so
the two minutes time that it's going to
take you to withdraw get up go to the
bathroom the sperm are fine you're not
going to pee out any sperm you don't
need to put any device in to keep sperm
in place keep keep your feet up lay in
bed you can go and do whatever you want
to do and in fact we know that urinating
after intercourse for women decreases
the risk of a urinary tract infection so
we try to encourage people to get up and
be normal I also tell people all the
time embryos and plant eggs fertilize
when you are up and living your life so
you don't need to just be horizontal to
have fertilization occur so what about
sex positions are there any sex
positions that are more conducive with
uh yeah whatever whatever position uh
allows for ejacul ation so this is where
variety is the spice of life because as
you alluded to earlier sex can feel a
little bit more of a chore when you're
trying to get pregnant or you're
struggling so making sure that
ejaculation can happen there's not any
position that is going to be better or
worse or going to have higher chance of
a boy or a girl or any of that kind of
knowledge if the female orgasms does
that increase the chance of fertility we
do know that orgasm does help uterine
contractions help get the sperm to the
eggs faster so we do know that so how do
we know that we would hyp how do we know
that yeah there have been studies
looking at there have been studies
looking at orgasm and then the speed of
which sperm gets to the Fallopian
tubes we'll just say that factors it's
like maybe it's just bigger and that's
just no so yeah just that those
contractions are helping kind of propel
the sperm up there what about penis size
so penis size really doesn't matter
what's interesting is that penis size
does tend to correlate with different
race and ethnicity also with vaginal
length so we tend to see different
vaginal lengths in correlation with what
tends to be a similar penis length based
on that ethnicity or where that person
originated from which is super
interesting but you don't need to you
don't need a smaller penis or a bigger
penis as long the sperm doesn't need to
get closer to the cervix A lot of people
obviously think that we when you eulate
it goes it gets right where it needs to
go okay crazy it's super interesting
I've learned so much about um all of
this stuff today I think there's
probably just two more things I wanted
to ask you about one of them is um you
mentioned birth control earlier and
there's lots of conversation at the
moment as to whether birth control is
healthy or not and the sort of side
effects and risks associated with it we
know everything and nothing in life has
is a free lunch there's always
trade-offs and side effects and would
you say that birth control and obviously
birth control comes in many forms as
well it's not just a pill there's you
know the coil and all these other types
of birth control is the pill
healthy I'll reframe and say the pill is
not necessarily unhealthy however it's
very important to understand that we now
have a generation of women who were
given the birth control pill when they
had a sign that something was wrong with
their body without getting to the bottom
of what it was which means we're just
kicking that can to trying to find that
diagnosis now later in life and causing
a of frustration so if your periods were
irregular you got start on the pill you
took it for 15 years now you're 35 and
you come off of it your periods are
probably still going to be irregular but
now you don't know why you're ready to
get pregnant and it can be very
frustrating so the use of the birth
control pill as treatment without
getting to the basis of diagnosis has
been a huge problem in women's health
the birth control pill itself does not
cause infertility it changes nothing
about the Vault the eggs are still
coming out every month you're just
losing them none of them are ovulating
the birth control pill itself combined
estrogen and progesterone the brain
doesn't send out that FSH so it's not
impacting the quality or the quantity of
the eggs that you have it does change
some of your metabolic parameters it
does change some of your vitamins and
every person's going to have a different
reaction to the pill so certainly some
people hate it but some people love it
for
endometriosis or you can have really
terrible PMS or what we call pmdd which
is like premenstrual dysphoric disorder
where you have these mental health
changes as your hormones change having
stable hormone levels can be
lifechanging so the pill definitely has
Medical Treatments it prevents the
cancer from PCOS it prevents
endometriosis progression it can treat
pain it can be something that can be
very beneficial and unfortunately we see
a lot of stigma with the birth control
pill right now on social media we see so
many people
talking about how bad it is and how
negative it is and how you're harming
your health by taking the birth control
pill you're not harming your health
however it's allowing too many people to
not have that discussion about their
family planning and not understand how
their hormones work so I always
recommend that somebody stops
contraception before they're ready to
get pregnant that way you can understand
are your periods coming regularly what
are the signs and symptoms that
something could be wrong so that you're
not behind the game when you're trying
to get
pregnant lots of people will be
listening to this now that are
struggling with a variety of the things
that you've talked about whether it's um
PCOS or whether they've been trying to
conceive a child for some time um
whether it's this new word that I
learned today
endometriosis whether they're in late
stage sort of IVF treatment and many of
the embryos have failed what is your
message to those people there'll be I'm
sure hundreds of thousands of them that
are listening right now
number one you can't control everything
but you should control what you can so
understanding getting the Sleep
optimizing your lifestyle you should
eliminate those questions from your mind
should you do it you should do it number
two there's no reason why you cannot
ever get let's say a second opinion if
you're deep in the fertility treatment
two often I see people who do the same
thing over and over and it's
heartbreaking because they're using
their time and their money and you might
need a new set of eyes and I'll even
tell my patients that if they're not
having success if you want to go get
another opinion go get it I support you
we support our patients getting those
extra sets of eyes extra input because
this is your one chance there's such a
limited amount of time from when most
people start trying to when your
reproductive window is closed that you
owe it to yourself to feel comfortable
with the choices that you are making if
you are not getting the information you
need from your doctor that's a red flag
if you can never talk to a doctor that's
a red flag if your periods are irregular
and you don't know why you need to see a
doctor if your periods are so painful
that it's interfering with your life you
need to go see a doctor if you know
you've been diagnosed with something
that somebody told you is going to make
it hard for you to get pregnant please
don't be reactive once you don't get
pregnant once you have infertility don't
try for 12 months and then come see me
if you know you have PCOS let's test you
now let's try to is start out on the
right foot to know that everything else
is working and have a game plan to
really try to help you achieve this life
goal Natalie thank you we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest not knowing who they're going to
be leaving it for and the question that
has been left for you inside the Diary
of a CEO
is What is the most difficult
conversation that changed your life
that's such a great question and I I've
been in a position to have a lot of
really difficult conversations both for
my own personal decision- making
changing career Pathways having my own
infertility Journey but the most
impactful conversation I ever have and
one that I react to my patients was
after my second pregnancy loss I
was the chief resident I was the
resident in charge of the busiest labor
and deliver unit in America and I
started miscarrying while I was on my
shift so I was bleeding in the bathroom
and nobody knew I was pregnant so I had
to carry on so I carried on did
C-sections delivered people's babies and
I left and went to my own OB when that
shift was
over distraught because I knew that I
was losing this pregnancy and I just had
to witness so many families achieve what
I wanted to achieve and my my OB when I
got there and she confirmed that I was
miscarrying and she said to
me it's really hard to
understand the meaning when you're in
the middle of the journey but one
day the world makes sense and it's your
job to not give up hope and to stay on
the path and that I believe that this is
going to happen that you're going to be
a mom and I may not have all the answers
why you're struggling right now but I
trust that if you keep going the odds
are that you're going to have the baby
that you're meant to have and when I
went on to have subsequent losses that
stayed with me that she believed I was
going to have the baby I was meant to
have and I'm going to cry now my
daughter like if any of those other
losses had worked out I wouldn't have my
kids the ones that are my everything
they're meant to be my children right my
daughter that egg that was in the vault
I would have lost when I was pregnant
because you still lose eggs when you're
pregnant
so I wouldn't have her if any of those
had worked out so the world has a way of
sometimes making sense that are so hard
when you're in the midst of the pain to
understand and I tell my patients that
same thing over and over that in the
journey it doesn't make sense but that's
not your job in the journey to
understand the wise it's to to keep
going and not give
up you must see so much of that pain how
do you
not you know how does that not come home
with you and oh it comes home with me
and I live it in the moment so I'm not
going to be the type of person who can
experience your heartbreak and not
experience it with you so I'm going to
cry with you and hug you and I'm going
to take it home and hug my kids and know
how happy and how lucky I am to have
them I frame it for all my patients as
I'm never going to sugar coat it for you
you know that I'm going to give you the
truth it's going to be hard to hear
sometimes but we know that we have the
type of relationship that you can trust
that I am giving you the best
information that there is sometimes do
you have to tell them that it's not
possible I do sometimes I have to tell
them it's not possible it's not going to
happen we need to look at other
alternatives for family building donor
egg donor embryo donor sperm I have
couples who sometimes had no idea the
man had no sperm and we have to
completely change what we thought a
family would be so I do tell patients
you know every week that this plan's not
going to work anymore and it's time for
us to step back and really think about
what that goal is is it a genetic child
I mean that was plan a but maybe it's
just a child a life you know maybe
there's other ways to get there than
what we were trying for so there's a lot
of pain in the job I always say I have
the best job and the worst job in the
same day every day what's been your
hardest day in work
the hard the hardest for me are are
going to be mostly in my past you know
training and obstetrics you know fetal
death still birth loss of a highly
desired I mean loss of any pregnancy
loss of
life
um I I those screams of those parents
you'll I'll never Escape them so
pregnancy is not Health neutral we act
like it's our once you get pregnant
everything will be fine every single
pregnancy could have
complications and I think it's really
important that we enter into that space
with the knowledge of what it is and
what it isn't but I the loss of life is
always going to be the
hardest Natalie thank you thank you so
much Stephen thank you so much it's um
you're doing you know there's kind of
two sides to this there's I I have a
huge amount of gratitude for the fact
that you're through your clinic and your
work you're helping people to realize
these very important dreams that they
have and you're Illuminating all of
the the darkness that causes the
uncertainty and the doubt and all of the
the things that come with trying to
build a family and you're doing that
through information but you're also
doing that in such a compassionate human
honest way and then
secondly because you do things like this
and there are so many people that don't
have the opportunity to go to a you know
a doctor or a fertility expert and sit
down with them because of the country
that they're in or the or the cost of it
or the the time they have or whatever
but by making this type of information
accessible to millions of people by you
know committing your time to do podcasts
and things like that I think you're
going to be helping so many hundreds of
thousands and millions of people that
you'll never get to meet so on behalf of
all of those people who I can feel at
home on the tube on the train on the
plane right now that are that want to
express their gratitude to you and I'm
sure that they will message to do such
exactly that I want to say thank you on
behalf of all of them as well um I've
learned so much I've learned so much and
my mind has been changed so I have no
doubt that there's millions of people
listening right now that have also
experienced the same thing so thank you
Natalie thank you and thank you for
holding space for this discussion
there's stigma here it's not the most
fun topic to always discuss about and
it's something that you're bringing it
to those people who might not come to my
channel searching for it but they need
to know the information so by putting it
in a place where they're looking for
other things thank you
[Music]